--- Page 1 ---
2 Routledge
— 2 Taylor & Francis Group
Feminist -. . .
Media Feminist Media Studies
Studies
=
ri
: ISSN: 1468-0777 (Print) 1471-5902 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rfms20
Crossover Fatigue: The Persistence of Gender at
Motown Records
Timothy Laurie
To cite this article: Timothy Laurie (2014) Crossover Fatigue: The Persistence of Gender at
Motown Records, Feminist Media Studies, 14:1, 90-105, DOI: 10.1080/14680777.2012.737344
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/14680777.2012.737344
oo Published online: 09 Nov 2012.
o>
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lili Article views: 2077
&
ey View related articles @
® View Crossmark data @
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=rfms20

--- Page 2 ---
Feminist Media Studies, 2014 a Routledge
Vol. 14, No. 1, 90-105, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14680777.2012.737344 TOE SICE Sane
CROSSOVER FATIGUE: THE PERSISTENCE

OF GENDER AT MOTOWN RECORDS

Timothy Laurie

This article examines the cultural politics of “crossover” at Motown Records, focussing on the

relationship between genre, gender, and career longevity. Beginning with the Supremes’ covers

albums in the mid-1960s, the article links notions of musical originality to commercial logics of
publishing, gendered divisions of labour, and racialised channels of record distribution. It also traces
the rise of the celebrity songwriter-producer in soul, including artists like Isaac Hayes, Norman

Whitfield, and Stevie Wonder, who fit a new mould of artistic authenticity that clashed with the

carefully manicured performances of 1960s “girl pop.” The professional mobility afforded to men in

both rock and r&b should prompt media scholars to consider the temporal dimensions of artist
trajectories in the music industry, and taking the constraints on girl group singers seriously allows for
reflection on (gendered) music industry knowledge about which audiences matter and for how long.

KEYWORDS music industry; girl groups; Motown; gender; race; soul

Introduction: Knowing Your Audience

“That guy, way up there, that guy, would you like to stand up?” Performing with the
Supremes at New York’s Copacabana in 1967, Diana Ross breaks into “You’re Nobody til
Somebody Loves You” for an anonymous special-someone in the audience. The crowd
loves it, and Ross barely makes it through the first line without laughter and applause. Three
minutes of false starts, side jokes, and rehearsed banter remind everyone that show
business is more than just the song, the voice, or the performer. It also means knowing your
audience: not just the fans or the devotees, but also those with the money and contacts to
make some special attention worthwhile. Controlling four-fifths of the juiciest market
slice—in this case, the Copacabana, but just as easily London’s Talk of the Town—can be
more profitable than one-tenth of the whole pie.

This article examines the strategies and politics of crossover at Motown, focussing on
the relationship between genre, gender, and longevity in the careers of artists for whom
success depended as much on the support of music industry gatekeepers as it did on fan
base loyalty. Beginning with the Supremes’ covers collections of the mid-1960s, | highlight
some difficulties in separating the notion of musical originality from the commercial logics
of publishing, gendered divisions of labour, and racialised channels of record distribution.
Tracing the sharp decline of girl group popularity in the late 1960s, the article then
considers the rise of the celebrity songwriter-producer in rhythm and blues (hereafter r&b),
including artists like Isaac Hayes, Norman Whitfield, and Stevie Wonder, who fit a new
mould of artistic authenticity that clashed with the carefully manicured performances of
© 2012 Taylor & Francis

--- Page 3 ---
CROSSOVER FATIGUE 91
1960s “girl pop.” The restructuring of music firms to extract brand value from producers and
songwriters negatively impacted many female artists who had been prohibited from
developing instrumental or production skills, or whose skills went professionally
unrecognised. This discussion expands on already existing studies of African American
women in popular music (see Harper 1989; Smith 1999, 99-107, 162-72) by considering
the life of certain images or recordings: how long do they circulate, and how are they
written into—or out of—popular histories? This longitudinal perspective is linked to a
broader critique of promotional strategies for female r&b artists as profiting from, but also
being constrained by, dominant racial and gender stereotypes about the listening practices
of girl group fans.

Crossover

In the study of American popular music, the term “crossover” has been used to
describe, in sometimes conflicting ways, a shift in appeal of black music for mainstream
(usually read as “white”) audiences; the successful penetration of black artists into white
music; genres of music historically associated with market fluidity (like “smooth” r&b); or a
broad designation for any artist who moves from a prescribed niche to an unmarked
mainstream. In all cases, crossover is at least part a rhetorical artifice dependent upon
historically contingent ways of imagining consumer identities, often according to existing
social expectations about the convergence of taste and social identity (see Harper 1989).
For example, crossover is now rarely used to describe the success of Italian American or
Jewish American artists (although it once was), or to account for genre porousness between
different minority groups—like the popularity of r&b among Hispanic or Asian Americans,
for example. Nevertheless, for as long as mass-produced singles have existed, the “black”
and “white” classifications of popular music genres have had concrete and measurable
effects, shaping where it is played, how it is promoted and written about, and what its
audiences expect from it. For an independent label like Motown Records, misreading the
racial logics of Billboard genre divisions, or failing to differentiate between supermarkets in
the Midwest and independent retailers in Alabama, could get even the coolest hit-makers in
financial hot water. Genre fictions then become interesting when undermined by the
commercial imperative to create different markets for goods, or to overcome social barriers
between markets even as new, equally fictional barriers are erected. The following
commentary on Motown Records’ Supremes provides just such an example.

Flops

The Supremes were late bloomers at Berry Gordy Jr’s Motown Records, an
independent record company based in Detroit, Michigan, whose early successes included
Barrett Strong’s “Money (That’s What | Want)” (1959) and the Miracles’ runaway hit “Shop
Around” (1960). From 1958 to 1964, Motown survived on an eclectic mix of doo wop, soul,
rhythm and blues, gospel, country, and occasionally rock’n’roll, but only developed its
winning formula, the “Motown Sound,” with the formation of the Eddie Holland, Lamont
Dozier, and Brian Holland (hereafter H-D-H) song writing and production team in 1962,
who wrote early hits like “(Love Is Like A) Heat Wave” (1963b) for Martha and the Vandellas.
The jewel in the writers’ forty-five rpm crown was the Supremes, whose “Where Did Our

--- Page 4 ---
92 TIMOTHY LAURIE
Love Go?” (1964¢c), initially considered too dull for release by Motown quality management,
scored an unexpected hit.

In November 1964, hot on the heels of a chart-storming “Where Did Our Love Go?,”
two other Billboard number one singles, and Where Did Our Love Go the album (number
two, 1964d), the Supremes released A Bit of Liverpool (1964a). The long-playing (LP) record
was re-titled With Love—From Us to You for the UK market, but despite a wealth of Beatles
covers and a geographically misplaced “House of the Rising Sun,” the love was not
reciprocated: it failed to even register on British pop album charts. In the US, the number
twenty-one entry was acceptable (by comparison, no original Martha and the Vandellas LP
ever scraped inside the top hundred), and a veritable godsend compared with the
following March’s The Supremes Sing Country, Western and Pop (number seventy-nine,
1965e), April’s We Remember Sam Cooke (number seventy-five, 1965f) and December's
Merry Christmas (1965a), a Phil Spector rip-off that made a fine gift for Motown sceptics but
practically nobody else. A string of non-covers albums—More Hits By The Supremes
(1965b), | Hear A Symphony (1966b), and The Supremes A-Go-Go (1966c)—and more than
ten number one singles helped to keep Diana Ross and her cohort in good fortunes, making
way for The Supremes Sing Holland-Dozier-Holland (1967a) and then The Supremes Sing
Rodgers & Hart (1967b), each stealing into the top twenty. A soundtrack to Diana Ross and
the Supremes’ Funny Girl musical was not so welcome on the Billboard pop charts, but this
did not prevent Motown from investing in a joint Supremes and Temptations NBC
performance called TCB (“Taking Care of Business,” 1968). The subsequent television
soundtrack finally took a Supremes live recording to number one. The ensuing rush of
similar joint albums, including the Supremes’ and Temptations’ Together (1969b) and On
Broadway (1969a), overcrowded an already busy market of songs already repackaged many
times since the mid-1960s.

Spotted successes aside, most Supremes’ covers albums were flops. If, as the popular
wisdom goes, the Motown factory had a tried-and-tested formula by the time of its 1964-
1966 commercial heyday, why record a country and western album? Why groom the
unrivalled queen of the girl groups, Diana Ross, as a middle-of-the-road Broadway
performer? Motown historians Smith (1999), George (1988), and Posner (2002) offer
convincing responses: number one hits for an African American girl group did not
necessarily equal shows at the biggest nightclubs or contracts with the most powerful
promoters, let alone career longevity. Coining a number one hit was less a guarantee of
long-term profits than having the right distributor, locating the right marketing niche,
developing a unique brand for the artist, producer, or label, and owning the rights to back-
catalogue sales. In particular, convincing music retail franchises and national radio stations
to play the Supremes involved pushing them beyond the segregation of the “r&b” label,
because in the late-1950s and 1960s, it was less often “we don’t play African American
artists” than “we don’t do rhythm and blues.” Promoters’ and retailers’ anxieties about
“fickle” African American musical preferences also artificially limited the lifespan of r&b
singles on the Billboard pop charts, such that, as one commentator later put it, “black kids
are ‘progressive’ because they've got no choice” (Barry Walters, quoted in Harper 1989,
116).

While in any American entertainment industry women’s careers are often rendered
precarious by the cultural emphasis placed on youthful “feminine” appearance, the
assumption that girl group fans were a weaker investment than classical or jazz aficionados
had particular deleterious effects on the durability of the girl group brand (see Whiteley

--- Page 5 ---
CROSSOVER FATIGUE 93
2005, 65-9). Major record companies found it less plausible that a popular black female
singer or girl group would have a committed listenership, or that their talents would endure
what rock critics—and Baby Boomer dads—love to call “the test of time.”’ While in any
given week, Billboard might provide a gender balance in its Top Hundred charts, the
longevity of female artists is generally less assured, partly because the music press assume
they will be less assured, and treat them likewise: “Women are a perpetual novelty, and
each new group of successful female performers is heralded as the first” (Davies 2001, 302).
Female artists are frequently cast as peripheral to the progressive movement of music
genre (tags like “rock women,” “girl pop” and even “riot grrrl” are volatile in this context),
making their long-term ill-treatment by journalists, promoters, and record labels appear as
if destined by “feminine” artistic choices (see Strong 2011, 398).

The career trajectories of black girl groups in the early 1960s were shaped by their
separate-and-unequal treatment by white promoters, distributors, A&R personnel, and
trade magazines like Billboard and Cashbox. Girl groups on independent labels like Motown
found their albums under-funded, carelessly compiled and weakly promoted. Because teen
girls’ tastes were believed to be more fickle than that of, say, the jazz collector, girl group
singles were rarely reissued after their first pressing, and failed to translate into album sales.
The two years between the Ronettes’ 1963 hit “Baby | Love You” and their sole LP,
(Presenting) The Fabulous Ronettes, meant a gap between a number two single and a
number ninety-six album—and, subsequently, the collapse of a career. Similarly, the
Crystals’ success with “Uptown” (number thirteen, 1962c) in March 1962 was followed by an
LP in May, Twist Uptown (1962b), that failed to chart altogether, while even November's
number one hit “He’s A Rebel” (1962a) could not save He’s A Rebel (1963) from complete
obsolescence by March 1963.

By diversifying their catalogue and performing show tunes on The Ed Sullivan Show
and at venues like the Copa, the Supremes secured a direct path to the pop charts and all its
promotional exigencies. Gordy reflects on the Supremes’ transition from a hits-based girl
group to fully-fledged entertainers in the vein of Nat King Cole:

| don’t think [the Supremes] ever thought seriously about singing standards and show

tunes, but | did. Even though our experience had taught us with Marvin [Gaye] on his

standards albums that the public wanted only Top 40 hits from Motown artists, | knew
those standards were the key to taking our people to the next level of show business—
top nightclubs around the country ... A #1 record meant nothing to the Copa, which was
home to superstar entertainers like Frank Sinatra, Tony Bennett and Sammy Davis Jr.

(Gordy 1994, 209)

The Supremes used showbiz connections to shed their associations with other girl groups.
For example, | Hear A Symphony (1966b) features subdued versions of the Beatles’
“Yesterday,” Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart’s “With a Song in My Heart,” as well as the
following liner-note commentary:

| sat one night last summer in one of the hallowed halls of the entertainment world ... A

few moments later a phenomenon that | have never experience before occurred. A

sophisticated urbane audience had suddenly become completely enraptured and had

fallen in love with these young ladies. (Scott St. James, | Hear A Symphony, 1966b)

In contrast to those girl groups for whom the liner-notes and images provided
“intimate” contact with imagined young female fans (Cyrus 2003, 175-7), | Hear A

--- Page 6 ---
94 TIMOTHY LAURIE

Symphony shifted the imagined space of listening from teens’ bedrooms to the “hallowed
halls” of the elite club circuit. In the same month that the “I Hear a Symphony” single was
released (1966a), the Supremes celebrated their ascent to the pinnacle of show-business
with The Supremes at the Copa (1965d). Playing show tunes like “The Girl from Ipanema,”
“You're Nobody till Somebody Loves You,” “Rock-A-Bye Your Baby with a Dixie Melody,”
and “Somewhere” from West Side Story (Wilson 1999, 172) meant disavowing the market
segregation of the “r&b” and “girl group” labels, while promising potential inroads for
Motown songs into the major highways of commercial song writing. The Supremes’ variety
show of standards by white composers (many who had themselves previously been
stigmatised as “white ethnics”) helped to consolidate their identity as racially-unmarked
pop stars, and to drop the connotations of racial solidarity that Martha and the Vandellas’
“Dancing in the Street” (1964) would acquire by the time of the 1967 violence in Detroit (see
Smith 1999, 181-208). Furthermore, the juxtaposition of The Supremes Sing Rodgers & Hart
with the Supremes’ “covers” album The Supremes Sing Holland-Dozier—Holland welcomed
the H-D-H catalogue into the noble procession of all-American tunesmiths,” as distinct
from rhythm and blues songwriters who had remained unpublicised in previous decades.

The Supremes Sing Country, Western and Pop also enabled upward mobility through
the erasure of “racialised” signifiers. In 1962, Ray Charles’ Modern Sounds in Country and
Western Music had alerted many listeners to the rich, often hidden histories of
communication between r&b and country (see Ward 1998, 47-8), and soon Motown had
its share of country tinged artists, including Gene Henslee (“Shambles,” 1964) and Dorsey
Burnette (“Jimmy Brown,” 1964b; “Ever Since the World Began,” 1964a). But despite
Clarence Paul’s strong song writing, Ross’s measured but subtle vocal performances, the
wood-grained saloon cover and a relatively demure photograph of Diana, Mary, and
Florence, nothing on The Supremes Sing Country, Western and Pop suggested a desire to
connect Motown’s r&b heritage with the diversity of music floating under the “country and
western” moniker. In marked contrast to Charles’ early 1960s recordings, there were no
playful vocal adlibs, loosely arranged jams or extended sexual innuendos. Rather, “country,
western and pop” became a device for catalogue diversification, imprinting the Supremes’
brand as a professional assurance of class, quality, and old-fashioned entertainment:

If you like the Supremes, and who doesn't, if you like it Western, if you like it Pop, if you like

it Country, or if you just love to be enchanted, you are sure to find that everything the

Supremes give you on this album will satisfy your desires. (Scott St. James, The Supremes

Sing Country, Western and Pop, 1965e)

Motown used country not to acquire a new genre niche, but to transcend niches altogether
through the stylised play of generic flexibility. Country covers were needed less to establish
cultural “roots” than to demonstrate that the Supremes did not have any, except the sacred
archives of motley but distinctive “American sounds”—Broadway, Tin Pan Alley, country,
and jazz—into which, somewhat fittingly, Motown’s hit singles are now often included.
Within America’s melting pot mythology, the enduring successes are not purveyors of raw
ingredients (blues, gospel, and hip hop are often promoted in this way), but those who
have the opportunity to diversify, or to cook their soup.

Not that the Supremes were faking it. We need not be unduly sceptical of Mary
Wilson’s claims to have enjoyed learning the hat and cane routines to many Broadway
numbers, or to having spent much of her Supremes income voluntarily on shopping
adventures for the matching outfits which made the group Las Vegas sensations (see

--- Page 7 ---
CROSSOVER FATIGUE 95
Wilson 1999). Furthermore, while much pressure was exerted on women to /ook like stars, it
is impossible to separate the paid economy of artistic innovation from the informal fashion
and choreographic innovations from group members themselves that gave pop songs their
oxygen in clubs and later on television. While legend has it that Diana Ross was brought to
the fore in the Supremes because of her limited vocal range, such criticisms ignore the
strains of singing everything from Beatles covers to a Billie Holiday musical to country and
western—demands not unusual, of course, for most female vocalists wanting to find an
entrance to the pop music world (see Stras 2010). We should take care not to moralise the
mixtures of commercial cynicism and subtle performance craft that animated the
Supremes’ rags-to-riches Fd Sullivan Show (1964-1969), Tonight Show (1965-1969), Dean
Martin Show (1965-1966), and Mike Douglas Show (1966) triumphs, even if “the intent
seemed to be to provide a flashy ‘mainstream’ oriented image that could be read back into
the music” (Harper 1989, 109). The issue is not whether the Supremes had authentic
middle-class aspirations, but whether the processes through which middle-class, black
femininity became visible within the US music industry were really beneficial for similar
artists in the long-term. The rest of this article shows that it many respects, it was not.

Branding and Publishing

To sell a recording beyond its initial Billboard four-to-six weeks, the artist brand must
be developed in such a way that their skills and reputation can be reworked according to
commercial demands. In particular, music companies must try to predict what Hendricks
and Sorensen (2009) call the “forwards” and “backwards” spill-over from hit recordings: how
will a hit recording help firms profit from already existing assets, and what possibilities for
new sales will they enable in the future?

By the late 1960s, constant television appearances and club circuit shows had
established the Supremes, and then “Diana Ross and the Supremes,” as a branded image
unhinged from any one musical legacy, other than obligatory renditions of “Baby Love”
(1964b) and their biggest seller to date, “Love Child” (1968), tucked between set lists of
otherwise familiar show tunes and standards (see Harper 1989, 104). However, there were
clear credibility issues around promoting vocal groups as floating brands with replaceable
personnel, and by the late 1960s the “group” had become secondary to the star, with
revised artist names including Diana Ross and the Supremes, Smokey Robinson and the
Miracles, Dennis Edwards and the Contours, and further afield, Bob Marley and the Wailers.
Diana Ross’s departure in late 1969 coincided with the Supremes’ second to last
performance on the Ed Sullivan Show and a final number one single (“Someday We'll Be
Together”) sung by Ross without Mary Wilson and Cindy Birdsong. Soon after, Wilson
encountered difficulties in securing the name “the Supremes” from Motown, discovering
that her 50 percent ownership only gave her control over the trademark if the company
were to be sold, which took another eighteen years (Wilson 1999). The singer’s subsequent
battles with Motown from 1974 to the late 1980s were symptomatic of her weakened
bargaining power as a performer who had no control over publishing licences and had few
recognised transferable skills as producer or songwriter. Like the Marvelettes at Motown
and Phil Spector’s Crystals, members of the Supremes suffered from the development of
the “trademark ... at the expense of the individuals who made up the musical group”
(Nahigian 2000, 153). Revolving-door performance troupes like the revived “Marvelettes”
could acquire the licensing to perform and re-record their “classics” without necessarily

--- Page 8 ---
96 = TIMOTHY LAURIE

involving original members. The mobility of performers was dependent on the idiosyncratic
trajectories of brands and other IPRs throughout the music industry: “The Marvelettes’
name, as | remember, was lost in a gambling party one night” (Martha Reeves, quoted in
Hirshey 2006, 155). The renaming of the Supremes as Diana Ross and the Supremes had at
least allowed the lead singer to cross over into film and Broadway productions, although
ultimately at a financial loss for Motown. By comparison, other Supremes—and many
unknown Marvelettes, Velvelettes, Vandellas, Vells, Burnadettes, Pips, and Serenaders—had
difficulty establishing distinct solo careers comparable to those of the Miracles’ William
“Smokey” Robinson (songwriter, producer, Motown executive) or later, the Commodores’
Lionel Richie (songwriter, producer, actor).

Another impediment to the longevity of Motown’s girl group performers was
publishing. Motown Records’ publishing arm, Jobete Music, was owned by Berry Gordy,
who also controlled artist management, so that the Supremes quickly became tied up in
the business of popularising H-D-H compositions as artistic commodities in their own
right. “Stop! In the Name of Love” (1965c), “Where Did Our Love Go?” (1964c), and especially
“You Keep Me Hangin’ On” (1966d), have all been covered by dozens of prominent artists,
including Rod Stewart and Cliff Richard, with the Supremes’ originals later re-emerging as
nostalgia pieces, most notably on the multi-platinum selling soundtrack to The Big Chill
(1983). The long-term value created by Mary Wilson, Florence Ballard, and Diana Ross, and
other later members of the Supremes in performing these songs, found its way straight
back to Jobete publishing, with subsequent lawsuits by Wilson and H—-D-H failing to
recover lost income (similar problems have plagued the Ronettes and Motown’s Mary Wells;
see Clover 2003, 396-7). For Ruth Brown, the “watershed” of Atlantic records’ and others’
exploitation of r&b stars like herself was

the enormous success of American Graffiti. The oldies soundtrack from that hit movie

produced a tonne of money for the companies who'd leased their tracks to Universal and

MCA, but hardly a cent to the artists who'd laid down the music in the first place. (Brown

1996, 213)

By renumerating those who “rent out” intellectual property rights instead of the performers
whose efforts gave those compositions value, Motown—like many other social
institutions—implicitly reinforced assumptions that the gendered labour of physical
performance and self-grooming is less taxing than men’s activities as songwriters or
composers (see Greene 2008).

It should not be forgotten that the Funk Brothers, an ensemble of jazz and r&b
musicians who made significant contributions to Motown arrangements in the 1960s, were
also casual workers who received limited royalties from the company’s stellar successes.
There are strong reasons to be sceptical of intellectual copyright as a sound means for
rewarding any musical creativity. However, cultural biases in music publishing have tended
to devalue performance style, rhythmic variations and instrumental arrangements, leading
to particularly high levels of exploitation among backing singers, backing musicians and
performers working in so-called “folk” traditions, including blues, country, and r&b (see
Greene 2008). For this reason, the important work of Rhodes (2005) and Whiteley (2005) in
tracing genealogies of female singer-songwriters like Grace Slick, Joni Mitchell, Kate Bush,
Bjork, and Tori Amos as exemplars of women’s progress in a male-dominated industry are
worthwhile, but limited when evacuated from the larger contexts of racialised genre codes
that enabled white rock artists to be promoted over and financially rewarded above both

--- Page 9 ---
CROSSOVER FATIGUE 97
men and women in r&b. When reflecting on Whiteley’s enthusiasm for Kate Bush's “well-
crafted album” and the “singer-songwriter tradition” as “the few alternatives to girl pop”
(2005, 10-11), one is forced to ask: who decides what counts as “girl pop,” how do we know
it does not involve singer-song writing (albeit unpaid), and what kinds of listening are being
legitimised here? As long as the record industry remains dominated by male executives,
producers, and performers, and while female artists are still encumbered by higher
demands around physical appearance in their public performances, the privilege of the
author as the key to musical creativity will continue to undermine women’s labour in both
rock and r&b culture, regardless of whether the laws of the land recognise that they “wrote
their own songs.” The next section examines more closely the social construction of the
singer-songwriter and the producer alongside that now commonplace phenomenon, the
rock LP.

The Men and Their Music

The late 1950s and early 1960s were shaped by what Keightley (2004) calls the
“temporal logic” of recording formats, in which “teen” singles—relatively cheap to buy and
easily mail-ordered—were treated quite differently to the adult LP, the main vehicle for jazz
and classical music and the warhorse for the crooner album up until the mid-1960s. The
dominant temporal logic of r&b publishing was to build songs and occasionally, signature
performers, but rarely to be precious about the longevity of the album:

What [record-company owners] found out in the short term was that controlling the

publishing rights of a song generated lots of money if white groups covered black hits ...

Neither label owners nor the artists had any sense of the future. All they knew was that a

black market existed, and if you had the right singer and the right arranger and got it to

the right deejay, you couldn't lose. It didn’t have to last. It probably wouldn't. No one

cared about longevity. (George 1988, 31)
However, between 1965 and 1967 record industry investments shifted increasingly towards
the promotion of LPs not just for classical and jazz enthusiasts, but also for the Baby Boomer
market, the largest single generation of young consumers in America’s history. Access to
this fresh-faced record-buying demographic was not shared equally between major and
independent labels, in part due to the shift in LP distribution channels towards “white”
suburban shopping malls (see Mittelstaedt and Stassen 1994). With retail franchises taking
over from specialised independent music shops, retailing strategies shifted from sales
savvy—the in-store assistant who could test-run twenty-eight songs in sixty seconds for
customers (see George 1988, 76)—to pre-selling records through television and radio
promotion. This minimised the role of the sales staff in favour of the more rapid turnover of
new stock, but also damaged relationships between independent r&b labels, radio stations,
and record stores, and increased premiums on music advertising astronomically (George
1988, 76-7; Mittelstaedt and Stassen 1994). These changes forced a shift towards an album-
driven market in which the concept or image of the album would be circulated on television,
through magazines, at festivals, in films, and on FM radio. An increasing concentration of
major label market share during the mid-1960s followed as rock albums became swept up
in revised economies of scale and bottlenecked channels of distribution (see George 1988).

Rather than directly competing with Motown, Wand, Sceptre, Vee-Jay, Atlantic or any
other label selling r&b recordings, major labels like Capitol/EMI and American Decca

--- Page 10 ---
98 = TIMOTHY LAURIE

saturated the market with artists such as the Beatles, the Animals and the Rolling Stones,
otherwise known as the “British Invasion.”* Imported British recordings could capitalise on
the success of the Supremes or Martha and the Vandellas (the Rolling Stones, the Zombies,
the Small Faces and the Beatles all recorded Motown covers), while bypassing the structural
obstacles for r&b and female artists within the American music industry.

Rock was not just a fixed ideology or aesthetic, but a synchronised value-added
economy of album-oriented promotional formats, concept operas, film sound tracking
(most notably Woodstock 1970), college FM radio stations (which departed from Top Forty
radio to provide album-cuts in loose programming formats), stadium concerts, and
franchised suburban distribution channels: “We learned you don’t have to be on Top 40
radio, that there’s a whole market in underground FM. We learned that posters mean
something, that billboards mean something” (Warner-Reprise executive Joe Smith, quoted
in Sanjek 1996, 516). At the same time, new ideas about aesthetic value—or old ideas about
new objects—came to saturate many of the sites through which rock was promoted. The
girl group became the inflated nemeses for rock journalists wishing to establish their critical
integrity against the teen pop-idol culture with which the Rolling Stones and the Beatles
could otherwise have been confused: “the term ‘teenybopper’ was naturalised to represent
types of music, fans and performers that were the inauthentic opposites of ‘true’ rock and
rollers” (Coates 2003, 69; see also Davies 2001, 311-16). Magazines like Rolling Stone
fetishised the songwriter-producer as an autonomous artist, whose “expressions of
personal honesty ... could be connected only to a specific artist’s career and lived
experiences” (Warwick 2007, 96), while major record labels relaxed their regimes of in-house
production by encouraging independent producer entrepreneurs to customise each new
artist’s distinctive rock aesthetic (Coates 2003, 66). Of course, many of the major labels who
cashed in on the rock sweepstakes had previously invested in r&b artists, most notably
Columbia Records which signed Bessie Smith and bought the catalogue of Mamie Smith in
the 1920s. However, as Sanjek (2005) and Harper (1989) have argued, these investments
were considered secondary priorities for major companies, who often let once popular r&b
catalogues gather dust while continuing to promote white, or comfortably “white ethnic,”
pop stars like Frank Sinatra and Elvis Presley.

The impact of the music industry's shift towards LP formats can be traced in the
uneven trajectories of Motown artists during this period. In 1964 the Four Tops, the
Miracles, Martha and the Vandellas, the Temptations and the Supremes each recorded
songs by the most respected in-house songwriters (H-D-H and Smokey Robinson) and
released slapdash albums to capitalise on singles successes. Martha and the Vandella’s
weak seller Heat Wave (1963a) featured only one H-D-H composition, filled out with Brill
Building and Phil Spector covers, while even the Four Tops’ albums included versions of
Beatles and Monkees hits. As Otis Williams puts it, “[when] it came to what artists could and
should do, Berry [Gordy] was very clear: artists performed, writers wrote, and producers
produced” (quoted in Smith 1999, 118-19). However, with the departure of the H-D-H
song writing team from Motown in 1967, clear schisms in the career trajectories of r&b
artists in a post-singles market were evident.

Unlike the Four Tops and the Miracles, whose respective 1972-1973 comeback
singles were minor bumps in a collective sliding downhill, the Temptations and Marvin
Gaye were taken under the wing of Norman Whitfield, who branded himself as a
psychedelic soul guru with the instrumentally ambitious Cloud Nine (The Temptations 1969)
and MPG (Gaye 1969), both the highest selling LPs of the decade for these artists,

--- Page 11 ---
CROSSOVER FATIGUE 99
respectively. The early 1970s’ careers of the Temptations and Gaye rested heavily on
concept albums, longer singles, and producer branding, the most striking example being
the Temptations’ Masterpiece (1973), a sprawling vehicle for the funk circumnavigation of
the title track. The cover features chiselled stone profiles of the Temptations with
“Produced by Norman Whitfield” engraved below, while on the back Whitfield manifests
ephemerally behind the vocal group, themselves caught in mid-step and quite unaware
that the toe-tapping 1960s are over. Monkees covers are quite definitely out of the
question, as are rehashed versions of past Motown hits. There is much truth to Gilroy's claim
that with the development of funk, “7 inch, 45 rpm singles, which became the standard
format of pop consumption, were subverted by continuing the same piece on both sides”
(1987, 215), but we need not assume that innovation is more commonplace in six-minute or
sixteen-minute packages than in three. In the case of dilating track-lengths on FM radio and
in urban nightclubs, the bulkier products attracted ever more elaborate promotional
strategies to be sold, many of which caused severe financial problems for both Motown and
Stax Records in the long term (see Posner 2002; Guralnick 1986; Ward 1998).

Accumulated capital from the successful promotion of girl groups in the 1960s
enabled Motown to launch Whitfield, Gaye, and (previously Little) Stevie Wonder as
synaesthetic media brands, releasing self-produced records with large budgets and
sometimes hefty returns, most famously Gaye’s What’s Going On (1971) and Wonder's
double-LP Songs in the Key of Life (1976). Hirshey narrates this transition in the following
way:

The fortunes Gordy invests now, in racehorses, in real estate, in film ventures, all are

courtesy of that golden decade, between 1962 and 1971. After that his company ceased to
dominate the charts. Though Motown’s record division is still better than solvent with

“new” acts like Lionel Richie, the Commodores, and Rick James, and standbys like Stevie

Wonder and Smokey Robinson, Martha [Reeves] believes that the latter two prevailed

because they were producer/composers as well, with distinctive sounds of their own. That
wasn’t true for a lot of the groups so dependent on production teams like Holland-

Dozier—Holland, Norman Whitfield, and later Nick Ashford and Valerie Simpson. (2006,

154)

Producing one’s “own sound” required professionalised instrumental skills, something
encouraged and socially cultivated in men through gendered social networks of informal
pedagogy and band practice experience. Stevie Wonder, Marvin Gaye, and Smokey
Robinson were joined by Isaac Hayes at Stax Records, Barry White at Warner Brothers, Curtis
Mayfield at his own Curtom Records, and Van McCoy on AVCO, multi-instrumentalists who
had written hits for other artists in the 1960s and had refashioned themselves as superstar
composers, arrangers, and quasi-filmic performers. Wonder, for example, had been a child
star at Motown who, in addition to writing some hits (and as many flops) during the 1960s,
had honed his diverse skills as an instrumentalist and arranger. This enabled him to
independently record two full-length albums in 1971 during heated negotiations with
Motown over the impending expiration of his contract. Wonder’s bargaining power as a
songwriter-producer enabled him to secure a stronger and more flexible contract with
Motown, compared with artists like the Supremes or the Vandellas who, despite greater
mid-1960s sales than Wonder, were not similarly rewarded for their extensive performance
work (see Posner 2002, 255).

--- Page 12 ---
100 =TIMOTHY LAURIE

Outside of Motown, Isaac Hayes provides a striking example of “crossing over” from
backroom songwriter to celebrity producer. Although Stax was much less Taylorist in its
divisions of labour than Motown Records, both labels thrived in the 1960s on thrilling stage
performers singing songs by backstage writers, many of whom had financial interests in the
firm (as Hayes eventually would). After a distribution contract with Atlantic ended in 1968,
Stax management realised it had been contractually manoeuvred out of its back-catalogue
licenses (Guralnick 1986, 356-8). The recovery strategy was to produce as many albums as
possible and as quickly as possible, and Hayes transformed from a relatively anonymous
songwriter to a champion producer, helped along by the surprise success of his rambling
but charismatic Hot Buttered Soul (1969). In addition to producing a string of slick
soundtracks for “Blaxploitation” blockbusters, Hayes covered five Burt Bacharach and Hal
David songs (“Walk On By,” “I Just Don’t Know What to Do With Myself,” “The Look of Love,”
“[They Long to Be] Close to You,” and “I'll Never Fall In Love Again”) that had been hits for
Dionne Warwick and Dusty Springfield, among others. Hayes’ choice of songs associated
with female vocalists made the audacity of his bold arrangements, not to mention his
bolder fashion choices, even more striking. The trademark soaring female vocals in Hayes’
mixes (especially “Man’s Temptation,” “[They Long to Be] Close to You,” “You've Lost That
Lovin’ Feelin,” “Part-Time Love,” and “For the Good Times”) aurally crystallised the revised
power relations between the male producer and the girl group singer.* Where previously
Franklin and Springfield had foreground female backing tracks to approximate call-and-
response dialogics, Hayes’ singers became distant, ambient, and anonymous. After the
mammoth success of his soundtrack for Shaft (1971), Hayes’ cinematic persona brought
together singer, songwriter, and producer in a distinctive expression of “signifyin(g),” as
Gates (1988) puts it—except that the double significations of the Shaft-esque utterances
were underpinned by the gendered split between performative imitation and creative
“repetition with a difference” (on the character blurring of Hayes and “Shaft,” see Guralnick
[1986]). Hayes managed to re-circuit the logic of artist branding so that he could record girl
group and diva songs when they themselves failed to meet the new commercial criteria of
artistic credibility. And lest the burden be placed too heavily on black funk arrangers, recall
that white English artists like the Rolling Stones and Humble Pie commonly used African
American female backing singers in similar ways on their early 1970s recordings, including
Exile on Main Street (1972) and Eat It (1973), respectively.

The cultural pores of funk and soul production were not limited to these most
recognised names, nor were women entirely absent. Margie Joseph's version of “Stop! In
the Name of Love” (1971b) tickled the top thirties on the Billboard r&b charts, and the eight-
minute album track from Margie Joseph Makes a New Impression (1971a) featured ambitious
embellishments of the Supremes’ signature tune. However, insofar as the track was
produced by ex-Hayes associate Dale Warren, Joseph struggled to develop a strong artistic
narrative, even across the album itself: she could sell a voice and a song, but she could not
sell the event of omnipotent orchestration associated with Gaye, Hayes, Wonder, or
Whitfield. This brings us to the gender politics of production cultures.

Behind the Desk

Although the early 1970s did introduce a new cultural climate for the dissemination
of black popular music, there was an important institutional continuity between the
gendered divisions of labour within the studio systems of RCA-Victor and Decca in the

--- Page 13 ---
CROSSOVER FATIGUE 101
1950s, Motown and Stax in the 1960s, and the consecration of male songwriter-producers
like David Bowie, Led Zeppelin, and Pink Floyd, as well as Gaye, Hayes, Whitfield, and
Wonder in the 1970s. As with Columbia and Warner Brothers Records, female artists at
Motown and Stax were rarely invited to produce or be trained in the instrumental skills
required for self-production.° With the exception of the Nick Ashford and Valerie Simpson
production partnership, Motown stuck to the entertainment business mantra that
rewarded men as producers while undervaluing female labour—from backing singers and
dancers to hospitality workers to accomplished arrangers—that helped to sustain the
music industry, and still does. This is not to deny female artists’ abilities to produce their
own records. On Lady Soul (1968), for example, Aretha Franklin provided arrangements for
her vocal accompaniment and many of the piano tracks, although as with other late-1960s
Franklin LPs, Jon Landau’s liner notes stressed how it took her male producers to reveal
Franklin’s voice to the world:

[It] should be noted that [Aretha] has received great help in this effort from her associates

at Atlantic Records. Producer Jerry Wexler and Engineer Tom Dowd take the greatest care

to preserve the purity of Aretha’s art in their handling of her recording sessions.

The myth of the naturally gifted African American artist overlapped here with the
ideological separation between intuitive female performers and trained male producers.
Although she was white and had major label distribution, the UK’s Dusty Springfield had
similar experiences, having directed many of her arrangements but never receiving due
credit: “All the hit records | had in England were found, produced and almost promoted by
me. | never took any credit ... But | did the whole bloody lot myself” (Springfield, quoted in
Randall 2010, 130).

Smith (2010, 154) notes yet another example in the career of Sandie Shaw, whose
self-produced rock LP Reviewing the Situation (1968) was quashed by her manager, Eve
Taylor, because it was seen to damage Shaw’s carefully honed female pop star identity.
Important examples of album productions by women can be found, like Laura Nyro’s
ingeniously understated Eli and the Thirteenth Confession (1968) and Alice Coltrane’s string
of spectacular psychedelic jazz productions on Impulse!, including Ptah the El Daoud (1970)
and World Galaxy (1972). However, each artist suffered from the limited mobility of their
creative “brand,” with Coltrane in particular overshadowed by the nostalgia value still being
extracted by Impulse! from her late husband John. These adventurous composer-
performer-producers were not invited to do celebrity production work beyond their own
recordings, unlike Hayes at Stax, Gaye (who produced Motown’s Originals), and Smokey
Robinson (who produced the Temptations), or songwriters outside r&b like Paul McCartney
(who produced Mary Hopkin). It was gender, not capability, that distinguished Franklin,
Springfield, Shaw, Nyro, and Coltrane from the producer's role in co-ordinating women’s
“marvellous gifts,” as Landau put it. Rock and r&b labels in the late 1960s both invented
their own versions of the genius male producer by reproducing clearly defined, and
exceptionally narrow, pathways for female performers across the popular music spectrum.

Conclusion

The Supremes provide a neat but not uncomplicated case study of a group whose
gendered and racial identities were strategically deployed to fulfil music industry
expectations, although not without some risk—The Supremes Sing Country, Western and

--- Page 14 ---
102 TIMOTHY LAURIE

Pop was, after all, a flop. For Diana Ross, at least, the Supremes provided a long-term career,

but precisely because she distanced herself from the Bermuda Triangle of the girl group LP

post-1967. The proficiencies cultivated in male artists in the 1960s—production skills, song
writing credits, near-monopolies on management roles, and business ownership—force us
to reconsider the relationship between gendered divisions of labour and the temporalities
of music genres themselves, as well as the implications this has had for record listeners’
influence over the production of culture. The record industry learnt to profit by churning its
own archives a long time ago, but academia, too, has its lingering investments in the rock

LP branding of the 1960s. The politics of inclusion in music historiography depends very

much on the material artefacts and temporal economies through which the Now is

produced and the Then remembered. We might benefit from coupling concerns about how
marginal groups get into dominant institutions, with the equally tricky question, at what
point could they be forced to leave?

NOTES

1. On the “test” of historical longevity as a gendered discourse within popular music criticism
and promotion, especially in relation to the canonisation of grunge, see Strong (2011).

2. Lorenz Hart and Richard Rogers were inducted to the songwriters’ Hall of Fame in 1970 and
H-D-H in 1988.

3. On the gendering of the British Invasion and the relationship between American and British
female r&b singers, see Randall (2010).

4. A similar example is that of Barry White, who first produced the girl group Love Unlimited
but soon achieved independent solo success, recasting Love Unlimited as backing singers
to his lavish string arrangements and erotic poetics.

5. Fora discussion of session recording cultures and girl groups’ experiences with producers,
see Warwick (2007).

REFERENCES

BROWN, RUTH. 1996. Miss Rhythm: The Autobiography of Ruth Brown, Rhythm and Blues Legend.
New York: Donald |. Fine Books.

BURNETTE, DORSEY. 1964a. “Ever Since the World Began.” Music Single. USA: Motown Records.

BURNETTE, DORSEY. 1964b. “Jimmy Brown.” Music Single. USA: Motown Records.

CHARLES, RAY. 1962. Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music. Studio Album. USA: ABC-
Paramount.

CLOVER, CORRINA CREE. 2003. “Accounting Accountability: Should Record Labels Have a Fiduciary
Duty to Report Accurate Royalties to Recording Artists?” Loyola of Los Angeles
Entertainment Law Review 23: 395-442.

COATES, NORMA. 2003. “Teenyboppers, Groupies, and Other Grotesques: Girls and Women and
Rock Culture in the 1960s and early 1970s.” Journal of Popular Music Studies 15 (1): 65-94.

COLTRANE, ALICE. 1970. Ptah the El Daoud. Studio Album. USA: Impulse! Records.

COLTRANE, ALICE. 1972. World Galaxy. Studio Album. USA: Impulse! Records.

CYRUS, CYNTHIA J. 2003. “Selling an Image: Girl Groups of the 1960s.” Popular Music 22 (2): 173-93.

DAVIES, HELEN. 2001. “All Rock and Roll is Homosocial: The Representation of Women in the British
Rock Music Press.” Popular Music 20 (3): 301-19.

--- Page 15 ---
CROSSOVER FATIGUE 103

DIANA ROSS AND THE SUPREMES. 1968. Funny Girl. Soundtrack Album. USA: Motown Records.

FRANKLIN, ARETHA. 1968. Lady Soul. Studio Album. USA: Atlantic.

GATES, HENRY LOUIS, JR. 1988. The Signifying Monkey: A Theory of Afro-American Literary Criticism.
New York: Oxford University Press.

GAYE, MARVIN. 1969. MPG. Studio Album. USA: Tamla-Motown Records.

GAYE, MARVIN. 1971. What’s Going On. Studio Album. USA: Tamla-Motown Records.

GEORGE, NELSON. 1988. The Death of Rhythm and Blues. New York: Pantheon Books.

GILROY, PAUL. 1987. “There Ain’t No Black in the Union Jack’: The Cultural Politics of “Race” and
Nation. London: Hutchinson.

GORDY, BERRY, JR. 1994. To Be Loved. New York: Warner Books.

GREENE, K. J. 2008. “Intellectual Property at the Intersection of Race and Gender: Lady Sings the
Blues.” American University Journal of Gender, Social Policy and the Law 16 (3): 365-85.

GURALNICK, PETER. 1986. Sweet Soul Music. New York: Harper & Row.

HARPER, PHILLIP BRIAN. 1989. “Synesthesia, ‘Crossover,’ and Blacks in Popular Music.” Social Text 23:
102-21.

HAYES, ISAAC. 1969. Hot Buttered Soul. Studio Album. USA: Enterprise.

HENDRICKS, KEN AND SORENSEN, ALAN 2009. “Information and the Skewness of Music Sales.” Journal
of Political Economy 117 (2): 324-69.

HENSLEE, GENE. 1964. “Shambles.” Music Single. USA: Motown Records.

HIRSHEY, GERRI. 2006. Nowhere to Run: The Story of Soul Music. London: Southbank Publishing.

HUMBLE PIE. 1973. Eat It. Studio Album. UK: A&M.

JOSEPH, MARGIE. 1971a. Margie Joseph Makes a New Impression. Studio Album. USA: Volt.

JOSEPH, MARGIE. 1971b. “Stop! In the Name of Love.” Music Single. USA: Volt.

KEIGHTLEY, KEIR. 2004. “Long Play: Adult-Oriented Popular Music and the Temporal Logics of the
Post-War Sound Record Industry in the USA.” Media, Culture and Society 26 (3): 375-91.

MARTHA AND THE VANDELLAS. 1963a. Heat Wave. Studio Album. USA: Gordy Records.

MARTHA AND THE VANDELLAS. 1963b. “(Love Is Like A) Heat Wave.” Music Single. USA: Gordy
Records.

MARTHA AND THE VANDELLAS. 1964. “Dancing in the Street.” Music Single. USA: Gordy Records.

MITTELSTAEDT, ROBERT A., AND ROBERT E. STASSEN. 1994. “Structural Changes in the Phonograph
Record Industry and Its Channels of Distribution, 1946-1966.” Journal of Macromarketing
14: 31-44.

NAHIGIAN, KENNETH. 2000. “The Great Pretenders: An Analysis of the False Perpetuation of the
Legacy of Musical Groups.” Journal of Legal Advocacy and Practice 2: 143-61.

NYRO, LAURA. 1968. Eli and the Thirteenth Confession. Studio Album. USA: Columbia.

POSNER, GERALD. 2002. Motown: Music, Money, Sex, and Power. New York: Random House.

RANDALL, ANNIE J. 2010. “Dusty’s Hair.” In She’s So Fine: Reflections on Whiteness, Femininity,
Adolescence and Class in 1960s Music. edited by Laurie Stras, 113-37. Aldershot: Ashgate.

RHODES, LISA. 2005. Electric Ladyland: Women and Rock Culture. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.

SANJEK, DAVID. 2005. “Tell Me Something | Don’t Already Know: The Harvard Report on Soul Music
Revisited.” In Rhythm and Business: The Political Economy of Black Music. edited by Norman
Kelley, 63-80. New York: Akashic Books.

SANJEK, RUSSELL. 1996. Pennies From Heaven: The American Popular Music Business in the Twentieth
Century. New York: Da Capo.

SHAFT. 1971. Film. Directed by Gordon Parks. USA: MGM.

SHAW, SANDIE. 1968. Reviewing the Situation. Studio Album. UK: Pye Records.

--- Page 16 ---
104 = TIMOTHY LAURIE

SMITH, PATRICIA JULIANA. 2010. “Brit Girls: Sandie Shaw and the Women of the British Invasion.”
In She’s So Fine: Reflections of Whiteness, Femininity, Adolescence and Class in 1960s Music.
edited by Laurie Stras, 137-62. Aldershot: Ashgate.

SMITH, SUZANNE E. 1999. Dancing in the Street: Motown and the Cultural Politics of Detroit.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

STRAS, LAURIE. 2010. “Voice of the Beehive: Vocal Technique at the Turn of the 1960s.” In She’s So
Fine: Reflections on Whiteness, Femininity, Adolescence and Class in 1960s Music. edited by
Laurie Stras, 33-56. Aldershot: Ashgate.

STRONG, BARRETT. 1959. “Money (That’s What | Want).” Music Single. USA: Motown Records.

STRONG, CATHERINE. 2011. “Grunge, Riot Grrrl and the Forgetting of Women in Popular Culture.”
The Journal of Popular Culture 44 (2): 398-416.

TCB (TAKING CARE OF BUSINESS). 1968. Television Special. USA: Motown Productions.

THE BIG CHILL. 1983. Film. Directed by Lawrence Kasdan. USA: Columbia Pictures.

THE CRYSTALS. 1962a. “He’s A Rebel.” Music Single. USA: Philles Records.

THE CRYSTALS. 1962b. Twist Uptown. Studio Album. USA: Philles Records.

THE CRYSTALS. 1962c. “Uptown.” Music Single. USA: Philles Records.

THE CRYSTALS. 1963. He’s A Rebel. Studio Album. USA: Philles Records.

THE DEAN MARTIN SHOW. 1965-1966. Television Series. USA: NBC.

THE ED SULLIVAN SHOW. 1964-1969. Television Series. USA: CBS.

THE MIKE DOUGLAS SHOW. 1966. Television Series. USA: Westinghouse Broadcasting.

THE MIRACLES. 1960. “Shop Around.” Music Single. USA: Motown Records.

THE ROLLING STONES. 1972. Exile on Main Street. Studio Album. UK: Rolling Stones.

THE RONETTES. 1963. “Baby | Love You.” Music Single. USA: Philles Records.

THE RONETTES. 1964. (Presenting) The Fabulous Ronettes. Studio Album. USA: Philles Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1964a. A Bit of Liverpool. Studio Album. USA: Motown Records. [Renamed With
Love—From Us to You for UK release.].

THE SUPREMES. 1964b. “Baby Love.” Music Single. USA: Motown Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1964c. “Where Did Our Love Go?.” Music Single. USA: Motown Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1964d. Where Did Our Love Go. Studio Album. USA: Motown Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1965a. Merry Christmas. Studio Album. USA: Motown Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1965b. More Hits By the Supremes. Studio Album. USA: Motown Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1965c. “Stop! In the Name of Love.” Music Single. USA: Motown Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1965d. The Supremes at the Copa. Live Album. USA: Motown Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1965e. The Supremes Sing Country, Western and Pop. Studio Album. USA: Motown
Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1965f. We Remember Sam Cooke. Studio Album. USA: Motown Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1966a. “I Hear a Symphony.” Music Single. USA: Motown Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1966b. | Hear A Symphony. Studio Album. USA: Motown Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1966c. The Supremes A-Go-Go. Studio Album. USA: Motown Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1966d. “You Keep Me Hangin’ On.” Music Single. USA: Motown Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1967a. The Supremes Sing Holland-Dozier-Holland. Studio Album. USA: Motown
Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1967b. The Supremes Sing Rodgers & Hart. Studio Album. USA: Motown Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1968. “Love Child.” Music Single. USA: Motown Records.

THE SUPREMES. 1969. “Someday We'll Be Together.” Music Single. USA: Motown Records.

THE SUPREMES AND THE TEMPTATIONS. 1969a. On Broadway. Soundtrack Album. USA: Motown
Records.

--- Page 17 ---
CROSSOVER FATIGUE 105

THE SUPREMES AND THE TEMPTATIONS. 1969b. Together. Studio Album. USA: Motown Records.

THE TEMPTATIONS. 1969. Cloud Nine. Studio Album. USA: Gordy Records.

THE TEMPTATIONS. 1973. Masterpiece. Studio Album. USA: Gordy Records.

THE TONIGHT SHOW. 1965-1969. Television Series. USA: NBC.

WARD, BRIAN. 1998. Just My Soul Responding: Rhythm and Blues, Black Consciousness, and Race
Relations. Berkeley: University of California Press.

WARWICK, JACQUELINE. 2007. Girl Groups, Girl Culture: Popular Music and Identity in the 1960s. New
York: Routledge.

WHITELEY, SHEILA. 2005. Too Much Too Young. London: Routledge.

WILSON, MARY. 1999. Dreamgirl and Supreme Faith: My Life as a Supreme. New York: Cooper Square
Press.

WONDER, STEVIE. 1976. Songs in the Key of Life. Studio Album. USA: Tamla-Motown Records.

WOODSTOCK. 1970. Film. Directed by Michael Wadleigh. USA: Wadleigh- Maurice.

Timothy Laurie is a PhD candidate in the Department of Gender and Cultural Studies at the
University of Sydney. His thesis examines genre and popular music, drawing on
critical race theory, feminist historiography and cultural political economy. E-mail:
timothy.laurie@sydney.edu.au
