--- Page 1 ---
|
1 :
Hip Hop Causes Violence
I'm giving you my opinion that says he is not an artist, he’s a
thug.... [Ylou can't draw a line in the sand and say Ludacris,
because he is a subversive guy that, number one advocates
violence, number two, narcotics selling and all the other
things, he’s not as bad as Pol Pot [Cambodian communist] so
we'll put a Pepsi can in his hand.
—Bill O'Reilly, on the subject of Ludacris as a
Pepsi celebrity representative, The O'Reilly Factor,
August 28, 2002
Ronald Ray Howard was executed Thursday [October 6, 2005]
for fatally shooting a state trooper, a slaying his trial attorneys
argued was prompted by Howard's listening to anti-police rap
music... . Howard’s trial attorney, Allen Tanner, told a re-
porter: “He grew up in the ghetto and disliked police, and these
were his heroes... these rappers .. . telling him if you're pulled
over, just blast away. It affected him.” Howard didn't say for
certain that rap music was responsible for his crime. [But he
did say:] “All my experiences with police have never been
good, whether I've been doing something bad or not.”
—David Carson (www.txexecutions.org/ reports/
350.asp, October 7, 2005)
I would say to Radio 1, do you realise that some of the stuff you
play on Saturday nights encourages people to carry guns and
knives?
—David Cameron, British politician, www.BBC.com,
June 7, 2006
33

--- Page 2 ---
34 THE HIP HOP WARS Hip =
A ASPECT OF MUCH OF THE CRITICISM that has been lev- murder trials. Prosecutors
eled at hip hop is the claim that it glorifies, encourages, and cases with defendants’ per:

thus causes violence. This argument goes as far back as the middle to mindedness.
late 1980s—the so-called golden age of hip hop—when politically The criticism that hip h:
radical hip hop artists, such as Public Enemy, who referred to direct lies on the unsubstantiate<
and sometimes armed resistance against racism “by any means neces- violent stories or consumir.
sary,” were considered advocates of violence. It is important to zero lent behavior. This conce>:
in on the specific issue of violence because this was the most highly during the 1980s, but alsa |
visible criticism of hip hop for over a decade. The concern over hip music. Although the direc
hop and violence peaked in the early to mid-1990s when groups like may appear to be commor.
N.W.A. from Los Angeles found significant commercial success vide evidence that confirm
through a gang-oriented repertoire of stories related especially to anti- industry's sale of exceptic:
police sentiment. N.W.A’s 1989 song “*uck the Police” —with lyrics stymied by the absence of +
boasting that when they are done, “it’s gonna be a bloodbath of cops ioral effect is, of course, a -
dyin’ in LA” —was at the epicenter of growing fears that rappers’ tales since many recent and pes:
of aggression and frustration (which many critics mistakenly per- contribute to a person’s 227
ceived as simply pro-criminal statements of intent) were stirring up rect proof doesn’t mean t=z
violent behavior among young listeners. The 1992 debut commer- ative impact. I am not ars:
cial single for Snoop Doggy Dogg, “Deep Cover” (from the film of violent images and stories. -
the same name), garnered attention because of Snoop’s laconic rap no impact on us. Clearly. =
style, Dr. Dre’s extra-funky beats, and the chorus phrase “187 on a an impact on us, to one Cs.
undercover cop” (“187” is the police code for homicide). As what we lent music lyrics have be:
now call gangsta rap began to move to the commercial center stage, thoughts and feelings. H:z
the worry that increasing portrayals of violence in rap lyrics might en- action (in our simulatec ~
courage fans to imitate them evolved into a belief that the rappers television but also, more =::
were themselves criminals—representing their own violent acts in the East) clearly do not sup: -
form of rhyme. Snoop’s own criminal problems authenticated his and responses in our eve> -
lyrics and added to the alarm about gangsta rap. As this shift in com- However, the arguir=-
mercial hip hop has solidified, many vocal public critics have begun storytelling, consumpti: >.
to characterize violence-portraying lyrics as autobiographical thug- tioned, given the limitec =
gery to a soundtrack. In turn, this link of violent lyrics in hip hop and more important, the bla::-
behavior has been used in the legal arena by both defense and prose- violence in some aspec*s °:
cuting attorneys. As the above epigraphs reveal, hip hop lyrics have be challenged for its tarz=
indeed been considered strong influences. Increasingly, this connec- ready overly and proble: :
tion has been extended into the realm of establishing character in may appear to be genu:>.-

_—_—

i’

th 6
i y
‘a F

--- Page 3 ---
Hip Hop Causes Violence Bo
murder trials. Prosecutors around the country have buttressed their
cases with defendants’ penned lyrics as evidence of their criminal-
mindedness.

The criticism that hip hop advocates and thus causes violence re-
lies on the unsubstantiated but widely held belief that listening to
violent stories or consuming violent images directly encourages vio-
lent behavior. This concern was raised vis-a-vis violent video games
during the 1980s, but also more recently, in relation to heavy metal
music. Although the direct link between consumption and action
may appear to be commonsensical, studies have been unable to pro-
vide evidence that confirms it. Recent challenges to the video game
industry's sale of exceptionally gory and violent video games were
stymied by the absence of such data and confirmation. Direct behav-
ioral effect is, of course, a difficult thing to prove in scientific terms,
since many recent and past factors—both individual and social—can
contribute to a person’s actions at any given time. The absence of di-

. rect proof doesn’t mean that such imagery and lyrics are without neg-
ative impact. I am not arguing for the regular consumption of highly
violent images and stories, nor am I saying that what we consume has
no impact on us. Clearly, everything around us, past and present, has
an impact on us, to one degree or another. Studies do show that vio-
lent music lyrics have been documented as increasing aggressive
thoughts and feelings. High-saturation levels of violent imagery and
action (in our simulated wars and fights in sports, film, music, and
television but also, more significantly, in our real wars in the Middle
Fast) clearly do not support patient, peaceful, cooperative actions
and responses in our everyday lives.’

However, the argument for one-to-one causal linking among
storytelling, consumption, and individual action should be ques-
tioned, given the limited evidence to support this claim. And, even
more important, the blatantly selective application of worries about
violence in some aspects of popular culture and everyday life should
be challenged for its targeting of individuals and groups who are al-
ready overly and problematically associated with violence. So, what
may appear to be genuine concern over violence in entertainment

--- Page 4 ---
36 THE HIP HOP WARS Hit
winds up stigmatizing some expressions (rap music) and the groups ers. Social psychologist ¢
with which they are associated (black youth). A vivid example of this cluded that the perceptio
highly selective application took place during the 1992 presidential by larger societal percept
campaign when George W. Bush said “it was ‘sick’ to produce a In her study, she asked p
record that he said glorified the killing of police officers, but saw no song about killing a poli
contradiction between this statement and his acceptance of support song was presented as raj
and endorsement from Amold Schwarzenegger. As one [New York ports the hypothesis tha:
Times| reporter put it: ‘I stand against those who use films or records more harshly than the sa
or television or video games to glorify killing law enforcement offi- concluded that these ide
cers, said Mr. Bush, who counts among his top supporters the actor tured in rap, perhaps b:
Arnold Schwarzenegger, whose character in the movies “[ermina- stereotypes of African-Ar
tor’ and “Terminator II: Judgment Day’ kills or maims dozens of Nevertheless, saying t>
policemen.” is being unfairly singlec -
We live in a popular cultural world in which violent stories, im- ment to make. Rappers
ages, lyrics, and performances occupy a wide cross-section of genres compelling case for hip =
and mediums. Television shows such as 24 and Law and Order; Hol- telling, especially for th::
lywood fare such as gangster, action, suspense, murder-driven, war, els of destructive force:
and horror films; video games; metal musics; and novels— together, important, however, to =
these comprise a diverse and highly accessible palate of violent im- geting, blame, and the :
ages attached to compelling characters and bolstered by high-budget as more violent has on >.
realistic sets and backdrops. Although anti-violence groups mention Second, many critic:
many of these genres and mediums, the bulk of the popular criticism and as a direct reflect: :
about violence in popular culture is leveled at hip hop, and the fear- equate rappers with thus:
driven nature of the commentary is distinct from responses to the and then use this “caus:
many other sources of violent imagery. There are three important dif- justify a variety of age=.2:
ferences between the criticisms of hip hop and rappers and those lev- prisons to accommoc::
eled at other music, films, shows, and videos— most of which, unlike people, and more cens:-
rap music, are produced (not just consumed) primarily by whites. is criminal propaganc: |
First, hip hop gets extra attention for its violent content, and the the individual to che:::
perception of violence is heightened when it appears in rap music rarely applied to viole=::
form rather than in some other popular genre of music featuring vio- Despite the caricat:
lent imagery. Rappers such as Lil’ Jon, Ludacris, 50 Cent, and TL. images and the similz>->
who claim that there is violence throughout popular culture and that terize rappers as speas..
they get overly singled out are right: Some violent imagery and lyrics their stories of car-":-;
in popular culture are responded to or perceived differently from oth- women, selling drugs. :
BRE oo

--- Page 5 ---
Hip Hop Causes Violence 37
“Ips ers. Social psychologist Carrie B. Fried studied this issue and con-
rns cluded that the perception of violence in rap music lyrics is affected
tial by larger societal perceptions and stereotypes of African-Americans.
ea In her study, she asked participants to respond to lyrics from a folk
10 song about killing a police officer. To some of the participants the
dort song was presented as rap; and to others, as country. Her study sup-
York ports the hypothesis that lyrics presented as rap music are judged
ords more harshly than the same lyrics presented as country music. She
“th concluded that these identical lyrics seem more violent when fea-
<tor tured in rap, perhaps because of the association of rap with the
cma- stereotypes of African-Americans.’
sof Nevertheless, saying that there is violence elsewhere and that one
is being unfairly singled out in connection with it isn’t the best argu-
“m- ment to make. Rappers’ claims that violence is everywhere isn’t a
nes compelling case for hip hop’s heightened investment in violent story-
4ol- telling, especially for those of us who are worried about the extra lev-
way, els of destructive forces working against poor black people. It is
‘at, important, however, to pay close attention to the issue of unfair tar-
- im- geting, blame, and the compounded effect this perception of blacks
get as more violent has on black youth.
clon Second, many critics of hip hop tend to interpret lyrics literally
zism and as a direct reflection of the artist who performs them. They
rear- equate rappers with thugs, see rappers as a threat to the larger society,
- the and then use this “causal analysis” (that hip hop causes violence) to
< dif justify a variety of agendas: more police in black communities, more
: lev- prisons to accommodate larger numbers of black and brown young
~like people, and more censorship of expression. For these critics, hip hop
5, is criminal propaganda. This literal approach, which extends beyond 5
< the the individual to characterize an entire racial and class group, is
madi rarely applied to violence-oriented mediums produced by whites.
= vi0- Despite the caricature-like quality of many of hip hop’s cultivated
P Td images and the similarity of many of its stories, critics often charac-
- that terize rappers as speaking entirely autobiographically, implying that
“TICS their stories of car-jacking, killing witnesses to crimes, hitting
~ oth- women, selling drugs, and beating up and killing opponents are
ul ~

--- Page 6 ---
38 THE HIP HOP WARS Ae
statements of fact, truthful self-portraits. Thus, for instance, the more prone to crime anc
thyme in Lil’ Wayne’s “Damage Is Done” that describes him as run- been reinforced, directly
ning away with a “hammer in my jeans, dead body behind me, outlets and institutions ar.
cops’ll never find me” would be interpreted by many critics as a de- contemporary scientific ¢::
scription of actual events. This assumption —that rappers are creating biologist Jim Watson saic
thymed autobiographies—is the result of both rappers’ own invest- prospects of Africa” beca
ment in perpetuating the idea that everything they say is true to their fact that their intelligence
life experience (given that the genre has grown out of the African- says not really.” He went -
American tradition of boasting in the first person) and the genre’s in- equal, “people who have =
vestment in the pretense of no pretense. That is, the genre’s true.” And in the now-in-
promoters capitalize on the illusion that the artists are not perform- Bell Curve, Richard J. He:
ing but “keeping it real” — telling the truth, wearing outfits on stage is highly likely that gene-
that they'd wear in the street (no costumes), remaining exactly as ing and intelligence anc :
they'd be if they were not famous, except richer. Part of this “keeping tant predictor of income.
it real” ethos is a laudable effort to continue to identify with many of crime. Thus the pseudc:..
their fans. who don’t see their style or life experiences represented cally less intelligent, anc -
anywhere else. from their own points of view; part of it is the result of ance, criminality, and ::
conformity to the genre’s conventions. It makes rappers more accessi- blacks are genetically <::-
ble, more reflective of some of the lived experiences and conditions motherhood."
that shape the lives of some of their fans. And it gives fans a sense that This history of assoc::-
they themselves have the potential to reach celebrity status, to gain viance, violence, and «>.>
social value and prestige while remaining “true” to street life and cul- lievability of hip hop a=.
ture, turning what traps them into an imagined gateway to success. fans from various racia. 2°
But this hyper-investment in the fiction of full-time autobiography sive anxiety about the = —
in hip hop, especially for those artists who have adopted gangsta per- American public has > z
sonas, has been exaggerated and distorted by a powerful history of particularly anxiety-pre <= ..
racial images of black men as “naturally” violent and criminal. These “performance” of blac: :-
false and racially motivated stereotypes were promoted throughout voyeuristic pleasure ¢: > =
the last two centuries to justify both slavery and the violence, con- minded and the exagg=:_-:
tainment, and revised disenfranchisement that followed emancipa- hop has successfully trz=- :
tion; and they persisted throughout the twentieth century to justify imbedded impact on 2=-.:
the development of urban segregation. In the early part of the twenti- been significantly crit! ::> =.
eth century, well-respected scientists pursuing the “genetic” basis of A third central difte::-
racial and ethnic hierarchy embraced the view that blacks were bio- rappers and the critic::>
logically inferior, labeling them not only less intelligent but also has to do with the way <>:
i ae Oe

--- Page 7 ---
—
Hip Hop Causes Violence 39
_ the more prone to crime and violence. These racial associations have
-un- been reinforced, directly and indirectly, through a variety of social
me, outlets and institutions and, even today, continue to be circulated in
: de- contemporary scientific circles. In 2007, for example, Nobel laureate
ating biologist Jim Watson said that he was “inherently gloomy about the
vest: prospects of Africa” because “all our social policies are based on the
“heir fact that their intelligence is the same as ours, whereas all the testing
+ a= says not really.” He went on to say that while he hoped everyone was
's in- equal, “people who have to deal with black employees find this is not
=Te’s true.” And in the now-infamous, widely challenged 1994 book The
->rm- Bell Curve, Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray argued that it
srage is highly likely that genes partly explain racial differences in IQ test-
<a go ing and intelligence and also claimed that intelligence is an impor-
ing tant predictor of income, job performance, unwed pregnancy, and
~v of crime. Thus the pseudoscientific circle was closed: Blacks are geneti-
ated cally less intelligent, and intelligence level predicts income, perform-
“it of ance, criminality, and sexually unsanctioned behavior; therefore,
- essi- blacks are genetically disposed toward poverty, crime, and unwed
“ons motherhood.*
- that This history of association of blacks with ignorance, sexual de-
ain viance, violence, and criminality has not only contributed to the be-
 agl- lievability of hip hop artists’ fictitious autobiographical tales among
ESS, fans from various racial groups but has also helped explain the exces-
- phy sive anxiety about the popularity and allure of these artists. The
2 Der American public has long feared black criminality and violence as
“3: of particularly anxiety-producing threats to whites—and the convincing
en “performance” of black criminality taps into these fears. So, both the
-rout voyeuristic pleasure of believing that hip hop artists are criminal
con minded and the exaggerated fear of them are deeply connected. Hip
ipa hop has successfully traded on this history of scientific racism and its
~astity imbedded impact on perceptions of poor black people, and has also
~enti- been significantly criticized because of it.
sis of A third central difference between the criticism of hip hop and
= bio- rappers and the criticism leveled at other forms of popular culture
- also has to do with the way the artists themselves are perceived in relation

--- Page 8 ---
40 THE HIP HOP WARS Ee en
to their audiences and to society. Hip hop’s violence is criticized at a them, close up. My poir: ><>
heightened level and on different grounds from the vast array of vio- am saying that rappers az - °
lent images in American culture, and these disparities in perception lieved to be and that see:~.z -
are very important. While heavy metal and other nonblack musical tacks they specifically fe:= >
forms that contain substantial levels of violent imagery are likewise that much of what lister=- -
challenged by anti-violence critics, the operative assumption is that flective of larger real-life <::.
this music and its violence-peddling creators will negatively influ- This is a crucial yet o==-
ence otherwise innocent listeners. ‘Therefore (according to these crit- not pure fiction or fants:
ics), metal, video games, and violent movies influence otherwise horror writer Stephen kK: z
nonviolent teenagers, encouraging them to act violently. From this social advocacy for viole= : -
perspective, “our youth” must be protected from these outside nega- ination (disconnected f:7
tive, aggressive influences. or sociological docume>: -
In the case of rap, the assumption is that the artists and their auto- of reality and personal ::- -
biographically styled lyrics represent an existing and already threat- hip hop strategically dez.:
ening violent black youth culture that must be prevented from it fiction, just like othe: z= -
affecting society at large. The quote from Bill O’Reilly at the outset of size rappers’ own claims ~ :
this chapter reflects this approach. For O’Reilly, Ludacris is advocat- ries “advocate violence -
ing violence and selling narcotics. Allowing him to be a representa- suggested, “[encourage =: >
tive for Pepsi would, as O’Reilly’s logic goes, be similar to giving Neither of these pos:-.:-.
power to Pol Pot, the Cambodian leader of the brutal Khmer Rouge understanding of viole=: -
government, allowing a “subversive” guy access to legitimate power. ward the fashioning o7 = >>
This difference in interpretation—such that black rappers are viewed nizes the impact of these =. «
as leaders of an invading and destructively violent force that under- accepting or excusing *>.2- -
mines society—has a dramatic effect on both the nature of the criti- straddle: acknowledg:= = ~~
cism and the larger perceptions of black youth that propel the ways policies that have creazs = ~~
in which they are treated. It sets the terms of how we respond, whom fractured black urban : ~ -
we police, and whom we protect. cepting or excusing the = =~2
Tales of violence in hip hop share important similarities with the local, social conditions.
overall investment in violence as entertainment (and political prob- The origins for the 227
lem solving) in American culture, but they have more localized ori- context-specific storie: ~~
gins as well—namely, the damaging and terrible changes in black crime are directly relazs - -
urban America over the past forty or so years. Although hip hop’s cial life, community, 272 7+
penchant for stories with violent elements isn’t purely a matter of borhood stability in =~ .-
documentary or autobiography, these stories are deeply connected to social condition—basec ~~ 5
real social conditions and their impact on the lives of those who live tion that violent mater::. >

--- Page 9 ---
Hip Hop Causes Violence 41

za them, close up. My point here may be confusing: On the one hand, I
:0- am saying that rappers are not the autobiographers they are often be-
on lieved to be and that seeing them that way has contributed to the at-
cal tacks they specifically face. But, on the other hand, I am also saying
"se that much of what listeners hear in hip hop stories of violence is re-
nat flective of larger real-life social conditions. How can both be true?
“ue This is a crucial yet often improperly made distinction: Hip hop is
rit not pure fiction or fantasy (such as might emerge from the mind of
“se horror writer Stephen King), but neither is it unmediated reality and
Als social advocacy for violence. Nor is rap a product of individual imag-
za- ination (disconnected from lived experiences and social conditions)

or sociological documentation or autobiography (an exact depiction
20- of reality and personal action). Yet conversations about violence in
=at- hip hop strategically deploy both of these arguments. Defenders call
2m it fiction, just like other artists’ work, whereas critics want to empha-
: of size rappers’ own claims to be keeping it real as proof that these sto-
cat ties “advocate violence” or, as British politician David Cameron
vta- suggested, “[encourage] people to carry guns and knives.”
‘nig Neither of these positions moves us toward a more empowering
ge understanding of violent storytelling and imagery in hip hop or to-
ver. ward the fashioning of a productive, pro-youth position that recog-
wed nizes the impact of these powerfully oppressive images without either
Cer- accepting or excusing their negative effects. ‘This is the line we must
vitl- straddle: acknowledging the realities of discrimination and social
AVS policies that have created the conditions for the most dangerous and
om fractured black urban communities and, at the same time, not ac-

cepting or excusing the behaviors that are deeply connected to these
“he local, social conditions.
“ob- The origins for the depth of investment in hip hop’s myriad but
ori- context-specific stories involving guns, drugs, street culture, and
ack crime are directly related to a combination of drastic changes in so-
ap’s cial life, community, and policies of neglect that destroyed neigh-
= of borhood stability in much of black urban America. These local,
= to social condition—based origins matter because the causal assump-
sive tion that violent material when consumed increases violent actions

--- Page 10 ---
42 THE HIP HOP WARS Fiz >
underestimates the environmental forces at work. Although hip hop’s ployment and very low-p2 -
violence has been marketed and exaggerated, its origins in violent ur- centrated in poor minor:>
ban communities and the reasons these communities became so vio- the twentieth century. > -
lent must be understood. This context helps explain why hip hop’s working-class opportur:> -
poorest inner-city fans and artists remain so invested in such stories. 1980s and continued t=: .
Rather than creating violence out of whole cloth, these stories are scholars and econom.:::
better understood as a distorted and profitable reflection of the every- “chronic joblessness” be 2°
day lives of too many poor black youth over the past forty or so years. nities, and the younger -
While context is crucial for explaining what we hear in a good deal stand that traditional + --
of hip hop, context as justification for rap’s constant repetition of vio- becoming closed to the
lent storytelling is highly problematic. Rapper Tupac, for example, The effects of deinc=:~ -
claimed that he was hoping to reveal the conditions in a powerful unionized, well-paying > .-
way to incite change: “I’m gonna show the most graphic details ral and nonunionized =: ~
about what I see in my community and hopefully they'll stop it. workers hard and dram z>.. .
Quick.’ Unfortunately, profits increased with increasingly violent, bility. This loss was ac: ><.
criminal-oriented rap while conditions remained and worsened. De- jobs, which tended to >= : .-
spite the reality that these real conditions are not being changed be- and few opportunities =~ =
cause of rappers’ stories and, instead, have become fodder for and contemporary for~
corporate profits, rappers continue to justify the use of black urban these overall changes =: =»
community distress and criminal icons along these lines, thus main- munities. Indeed, blacs . >:
taining their value as a revenue stream. 50 Cent defended his lyrics, when factories close= . :
claiming that “{i]t’s a reflection of the environment that | come lower-level positions ~~ =-:
from,” and Jay-Z has confessed that “it’s important for rappers to ex- (and thus job rehiring =>
aggerate ‘life in the ghetto’ because this is the only way the under- Reagan’s second term. ~~ ;
class can make its voice heard.”° families earned inco:.: >: 1
This context—the destruction of black community in urban Amer- rates hovered betwee: >. :
ica since the mid-1970s—has five central elements, each of which the same period, ble:- ~:~:
exacerbates the others, causing the serious dismantling of stable com- ment increased from. >> -
munities and resulting in several forms of social breakdown, one of gions, such as the \I:_ . =z
which is increased violence. figures were as high 2 > x
unemployment was e>_
High Levels of Chronic Joblessness Chronic a Te a
creates, especially «7: a
The issue of black and brown teen joblessness took on crisis propor- discrimination, proc... ~
tions during the first two decades of hip hop’s emergence. Unem- ties within families 2-: . -

--- Page 11 ---
i
Hip Hop Causes Violence +5
"| ployment and very low-paying, unstable employment have been con-
~ centrated in poor minority urban communities since the early part of
*- the twentieth century, but this lengthy history of how race limits
9 working-class opportunity took an especially pernicious turn in the
‘. 1980s and continued through the 1990s and beyond. What many
a scholars and economists call “permanent unemployment” or
= “chronic joblessness” began to plague poor black and brown commu-
- nities, and the younger adults in these communities began to under-
=] stand that traditional avenues for working-class job stability were
» becoming closed to them.
2. The effects of deindustrialization—the swift and extensive loss of
3] unionized, well-paying manufacturing jobs out of urban areas to ru-
r ral and nonunionized regions and out of the country entirely —hit all
= workers hard and dramatically undercut working-class economic mo-
=, bility. This loss was accompanied by a growth in low-wage “service”
= jobs, which tended to be part-time and to offer limited or no benefits
a and few opportunities for upward mobility. Owing to both historical
ir and contemporary forms of racial discrimination in the job market,
an these overall changes have been especially devastating for black com-
4. munities. Indeed, blacks continued to be last hired and thus first fired
“3, when factories closed, and they were disproportionately kept in
=e lower-level positions where upward advancement and skill-building
=X (and thus job rehiring opportunities) are limited. During Ronald
er Reagan’s second term, for example, more than one-third of black
families earned incomes below the poverty line. By contrast, poverty
fe rates hovered between 8 and 9 percent among white families. During
ch the same period, black teenagers’ already high levels of unemploy-
m- ment increased from 38.9 to +3.6 percent nationally, and in some re-
ot gions, such as the Midwestern cities in the Great Lakes region, the
figures were as high as 50 to 70 percent. By contrast, white teenage
unemployment was around 13 percent.”
Chronic and very high levels of unemployment and the poverty it
creates, especially when magnified by long-standing injustice and
oot discrimination, produce not only economic crisis but deep instabili-
m- ties within families and across communities. These, in turn, result in

--- Page 12 ---
44 THE HIP HOP WARS His Z
higher levels of homelessness, street crime, and illegal income- newal. ... Similarly in Ne~.
generating activities (such as the drug trade), and alienation, rage, income housing units hz" =
and violence. sidered... . [D]uring the «
mostly low income, have >::
Dramatic Loss of Affordable Housing/ reneswal, priblis housing &=

Urban Renewal This pattern of demolish:-z

The legacies of thirty years of “urban renewal” began to bear rotten existing affordable hous:~z
fruit in the middle to late 1970s. Dubbed “negro removal” by James tating impact in black cc~--
Baldwin, the urban renewal programs designed to “clear slums” the constellation of symzz:—
because they were considered “eyesores” proved to be terribly ill- This was not just a he-z:.-
conceived forms of neighborhood destruction that had a dispro- it produced was imme=::
portionately negative impact on poor black urban communities. buildings was accompa:. =:
While the migration of millions of black people to cities in the twen- cent venues aud stores i"
tieth century was met with forced urban housing segregation (pro- stores, music clubs, soc::. -
ducing what we now call black ghettos), those neighborhoods were were also displaced or 2: —
also sources of community strength and general stability. Yes, patterns of connection. $::.
poverty, discrimination, and other urban problems persisted, but the destruction eanged *
areas like Watts in Los Angeles, Harlem in New York City, East St. matic svess reaction ir =
Louis, and the Hill District in Pittsburgh became stable, multiclass tional ecosystem.” Sk: ::
communities where black people, as scholar Earl Lewis maintained, destruction of housing =>. °
“turned segregation into congregation.” destroyed communities. -= -

Urban renewal, especially during and after the 1960s, destroyed els of violence:
these low-income but highly network-rich and socially stable com-

munities to make room for private development, sports arenas, ho- Root shock, at the lev! --—
tels, trade centers, and high-income luxury buildings. Far from being heaval. . . . [It] undezs - =
a plan to create affordable housing, it created the massive housing relationships, destrovs ©: .
crisis we still face today. By the summer of 1967, 400,000 residential imorenses the xick fore s* «
units in urban renewal areas had been demolished; only 10,760 low- sion. io heetfathedk E--< =
rent public housing units were built on these sites. In 1968, the _. . ruptures bonds. c:s7 +7
Kerner Commission report pointed out that pass. ... The great ¢2.2:~
black family and the =: : -
[i]n Detroit a maximum of 758 low-income units have been assisted catastrophes followe= <= -
through (federal) programs since 1956... . Yet, since 1960, approxi- cede it. Though thers 2°: .
mately 8,000 low-income units have been demolished for urban re- cannot be disputed—---

--- Page 13 ---
Hip Hop Causes Violence 45
e+ newal. . . . Similarly in Newark, since 1959, a maximum of 3,760 low-

Ze, income housing units have been assisted through the programs con-
sidered. . . . [D]uring the same period, more than 12,000 families,
mostly low income, have been displaced by such public uses of urban
renewal, public housing and highways.°

This pattern of demolishing and not replacing thousands of units of
én existing affordable housing in poor black communities had a devas-
8S tating impact in black communities all around the country, creating

a the constellation of symptoms in many major cities that we see today.

a This was not just a housing problem, although the homeless crisis

70- it produced was immense. The physical destruction of so many

zs. buildings was accompanied by the demolition of most of the adja-

ani cent venues and stores that served as community adhesive. Corner
ce- stores, music clubs, social clubs, beauty parlors, and barber shops
=Te were also displaced or destroyed, fraying community networks and

24 patterns of connection. Social psychologist Mindy Fullilove refers to

cut the destruction caused by urban renewal as “root shock,” the “trau-

St. matic stress reaction to the destruction of all or part of one’s emo-

ASS tional ecosystem.” She astutely contextualizes this widespread

ed, destruction of housing and the social networks around it as one that

destroyed communities, resulting in social disarray and increased lev-
ved els of violence:

me

10- Root shock, at the level of the individual, is a profound emotional up-

aig heaval. . . . [It] undermines trust, increases anxiety, . . . destabilizes

ng relationships, destroys social, emotional and financial resources, and
dial increases the risk for every kind of stress-related disease, from depres-

TW- sion to heart attack. Root shock, at the level of the local community,

che ... ruptures bonds, dispersing people to all the directions of the com-
pass... . The great epidemics of drug addiction, the collapse of the
black family and the rise in incarceration of black men—all of these

= catastrophes followed the civil rights movement, they did not pre-

- cede it. Though there are a number of causes of this dysfunction that

- cannot be disputed—the loss of manufacturing jobs, in particular—

--- Page 14 ---
46 THE HIP HOP WARS Hic
the current situation of Black America cannot be understood without nationwide. Many rappe
a full and complete accounting of the social, economic, cultural, po- known for transforming th:
litical and emotional losses that followed the bulldozing of 1,600 Lyrics that reflect their his
neighborhoods.’ example, the chorus for =
crack, I love to stay strappz
Brag Trade Expansion But the crisis was so we
comedians such as Chr‘:
The emergence of very cheap, addictive, and profitable drugs, such grew up in and around t=:
as PCP, but especially crack cocaine, in the mid-1980s made bad came out with popular. :
matters worse. The bleak economic reality of high levels of chronic about crack addiction a=.
joblessness and the loss of community networks produced by the de- sense, the ground-level ‘=
struction of black communities and massive housing demolition cre- munity destruction bec:
ated not only a financial incentive for dealing hard drugs but an black youth. In a Rollirz
emotional one as well. The desire for drugs is directly linked to the the deep effects that cra:+
longing to numb pain and suffering. Cheap, easily accessible, and relations in black comm.
highly addictive drugs like crack are especially alluring to the poor about crack? So many <>
and others who face not only their own personal demons but also crack.” Rock replies: “B::
demons unleashed by society that are largely beyond their control. started getting laid wil. --
The affordability and profitability of crack created quick wealth for crack was just a big par: :
otherwise chronically unemployed people turned street dealers and girls I use to like getting >.
fostered violent drug-gang turf wars and a whole generation of people the ghetto had crack... . °
in the clutches of a highly addictive drug. shit. I lost friends and fa.
This was at once a new phenomenon and part of a long history of kinda on crack. Especiz..
black communities’ serving as commercial shopping zones for all And in one of many Dz |
drug users from all class positions and racial backgrounds; crack’s no- crack-head Tyrone Bigz.:-
toriously addictive qualities and low price—coupled with inattention jacked you, Rhonda?” K-
to attacking drug distribution at higher levels—created a flourishing it three hours later aslezz
local and violent drug trade that spurred, expanded, and intensified impossible, Rhonda. H:~
gang activities in poor black and brown communities. The impact of Chinese riddle for you.”
drug addiction on the social public sphere was dramatic. The street
sex trades became more linked to drugs; women especially, but also AK-47-
men who needed only a small amount of cash to get high, began sell- _
ing themselves to support their crack habit. Drug addiction, which as
also fueled the spread of HIV/AIDS, was both a symptom and a cause If this highly profitable _ -
of the extraordinary breakdown of poor black urban communities fists and knives, it wou.= -

--- Page 15 ---
- ie. i
Hip Hop Causes Violence AT
nationwide. Many rappers such as Jay-Z, 50 Cent, and Tl. are
known for transforming themselves from drug dealers to rap moguls.
Lyrics that reflect their history as drug dealers abound. Consider, for
example, the chorus for 50 Cent’s “Bloodhound”: “I love to pump
crack, J love to stay strapped.”

But the crisis was so widespread that a whole generation of black
comedians such as Chris Rock, David Chapelle, and others who
grew up in and around this very dark period in black urban America
came out with popular, biting, powerful routines and dark jokes
about crack addiction and its impact on black communities. In a
sense, the ground-level impact of crack, unemployment, and com-
munity destruction became a generational experience for many
black youth. In a Rolling Stone interview, Chris Rock talked about
the deep effects that crack had on the economic, social, and gender
relations in black communities. The interviewer asked him: “How
about crack? So many of your jokes and characters revolve around
crack.” Rock replies: “Basically, whatever was going on when you
started getting laid will stick with you for the rest of your life. So
crack was just a big part of my life, between my friends selling it or
girls | use to like getting hooked on it. White people had the Internet,
the ghetto had crack. . . . | have never been to war, but I survived that
shit. I lost friends and family members. The whole neighborhood was
kinda on crack. Especially living in Bed-Stuy [in Brooklyn], man.”
And in one of many David Chapelle skits featuring the memorable
crack-head Tyrone Biggums, Biggums says: “Why do you think I car-
jacked you, Rhonda?” Rhonda replies, “‘Cause the cops found you in
it three hours later asleep, high on crack!” Biggums responds: “That's
impossible, Rhonda. How can you sleep when you're high on crack?
Chinese riddle for you.”"

AK-47: Automatic Weapons
and the Drug Economy
If this highly profitable illegal drug trade had been protected just by
fists and knives, it would have been violent but not nearly as deadly.
ee

--- Page 16 ---
48 THE HIP HOP WARS Hip Hi
Instead, this always violent young men’s drug trade was fueled by in Vietnam, on U.S. citizer
easy access to guns, especially high-powered automatic weaponry. slash-and-burn approach, or
Given the financial incentives of crack, drug dealers used the most problem and barely distingu:
powerful weapons available to protect their businesses. And, increas- communities as a whole, tur
ingly, those not involved in selling drugs, especially young black men pied territories. Helicopter -
who were considered part of the same age and gender demographic, with battering rams were hz
felt they had to carry guns to protect themselves. Central LA in the widdle
Neighborhood turf wars have a long bloody history in immigrant equipped with police substz:
and working-class communities; tales of street peril among white tinely picked up for “pote=
male immigrant youth over 100 years ago bear a striking resemblance placed in a database; many ~
to descriptions of today’s invisible neighborhood boundaries and the the government failed to 2:
dangerous street conflict they give rise to. But what really escalated sponses such as rehabilitz-:
this situation was the emergence of the highly lucrative crack trade supervised recreational ou
and the flooding of poor urban communities with guns, especially support networks around ¢7~
semiautomatic ones. (Geoffrey Canada’s book Fist, Stick, Knife, Gun The criminal justice s.<:
chronicles the impact of the availability of this increasingly deadly defining crack offenses as =
weaponry and its impact on adolescent male violence.) Few young applying and effectively izs=.
men fifty years ago lost their lives in street skirmishes, bloody and fre- dubbed “maximum miniz-:-
quent though they were, as access to deadly weapons was extremely ers, who were poor and =7é:
limited then and the reasons for such turf battles were personal rather caine, a drug more often =:
than wedded to the extremely lucrative high-stakes drug trade. users, In fact, although czz::
Greedy high-level drug dealers and gun dealers, enabled both by the gredient, crack cocaine i: --:
gun lobby and by terribly misguided and neglectful public policy, simple possession can i=.:2.:
turned a long-standing problem into a life-threatening crisis of ex- tence. Possession of five <72~.
traordinary proportions. tory minimum sentenc: |
Sentencing Commissior.. © -

Government/Police Response: other substance by a firse== =

. sl is a misdemeanor offers= = —

Incarceration over Rehabilitation oe 3

prison.” Owing to the c=:.>-.
The 1980s “war on drugs” was really a war on the communities that than as people in need =: -:-.
bore the brunt of the drug crisis. The police and federal resource em- ing of crack users and 22: =
phasis on low-level street dealers and the criminalization (rather than prison population skyrez: ==:
rehabilitation) of drug users resulted in the treatment of ravaged 1986, before mandator: ~ -.
communities as war zones. The LAPD, for example, is considered fect, the average federa. -~ :
legendary for its use of military strategies, developed during the war cent higher than for w=:-: >

--- Page 17 ---
Hip Hop Causes Violence 49
Dy in Vietnam, on U.S. citizens in South Central Los Angeles. This
TV. slash-and-burn approach, one that failed to address the roots of the
ost problem and barely distinguished between the drug dealers and the
-aS- communities as a whole, turned poor black communities into occu-
oh pied territories. Helicopter surveillance and small tanks equipped
iG; with battering rams were hallmarks of the LAPD policing in South
Central LA in the middle to late 1980s. Housing projects were
ant equipped with police substations, and young black males were rou-
ate tinely picked up for “potential gang activity.” Their names were
“ce placed in a database; many were intimidated and brutalized. And yet
che the government failed to enact effective community-building re-
zed sponses such as rehabilitation, meaningful and stable jobs, well-
-de supervised recreational outlets, and social services to enhance the
ally support networks around children.
at The criminal justice system reinforced this warlike strategy by
dly defining crack offenses as more criminal than other drug offenses,
ng applying and effectively justifying longer sentences (especially those
“re dubbed “maximum minimum” sentences) for crack users and deal-
say ers, who were poor and predominantly black, than for users of co-
Ser caine, a drug more often consumed by middle-class and white drug
ae; users. In fact, although crack and cocaine possess the same active in-
“He gredient, crack cocaine is the only drug whereby the first offense of
iP simple possession can initiate a federal mandatory minimum sen-
ex- tence. Possession of five grams of crack will trigger a five-year manda-
tory minimum sentence. By contrast, according to the U.S.
Sentencing Commission, “simple possession of any quantity of any
other substance by a first-time offender— including powder cocaine —
is a misdemeanor offense punishable by a maximum of one year in
prison.” Owing to the designation of drug users as criminals rather
at than as people in need of rehabilitation (and given the special target-
eutl- ing of crack users and dealers over all other drug users), the black
an prison population skyrocketed and so did the parolee population. In
zed 1986, before mandatory minimums for crack offenses went into ef
ced fect, the average federal drug offense sentence for blacks was 11 per-
‘war cent higher than for whites; four years later—after these harsher and

--- Page 18 ---
50 THE HIP HOP WARS
targeted laws were implemented, the average federal drug offense where “so many resider
sentence was 49 percent higher for blacks. In 1997, the U.S. Sen- their incarceration will
tencing Commission report found that “nearly 90 percent of the of- alone, there were thirty:
fenders convicted in federal court for crack cocaine distribution are black women have alsc
African-American while the majority of crack cocaine users are most half of the female
white. Thus, sentences appear to be harsher and more severe for women are locked up i
racial minorities than others as a result of this law.” The extensive de- tion, and drugs) that are
nial of the ways that race and racism shaped and consolidated vio- struction addressed in
lence, instability, and poverty continued to fuel misguided and these disproportionate a
mean-spirited policies that focused far more on emphasizing per- ceration is staggering. -
sonal behavioral responsibility and punishment than on community These are the archi:
support and collective responsibility." lence that takes place «
The “war on drugs” policy that favored punishment over other social discrimination long agc
responses was singularly responsible for the incredible expansion of the ties since the 1960s.
prison industrial complex and the heavy impact this had on poor black violence, drugs, and in:
communities. Between 1970 and 1982 the U.S. prison population dou- nities are the direct res:
bled in size; between 1982 and 1999, it increased again threefold. joblessness, loss of aftc
Within the United States today are only 5 percent of the world’s inhab- crack explosion, the i:
itants but 25 percent of the world’s prisoners. Of the 2 million Ameri- weapons used to defen
cans currently behind bars, black men and women, who comprise strategies that have crin
around 12 percent of the national population, are profoundly overrep- population. While not
resented. Currently, black men make up 40 percent of prisoners in fed- urban America, some
eral, state, and local prisons. Researchers anticipate that this trend will there. These recent cor.
continue; based on current policies and conditions, they say that 30 as the long-term effect
percent of black men born today can expect to spend some time in racial discrimination, ir.
prison. Among current black male prisoners, a disproportionately high and poor black urban ¢
number come from a small number of predominantly or entirely mi- Hip hop emerged ir.
nority neighborhoods in big cities where aggressive street-level policing ing, pimping, petty crir
and profiling are heavily practiced. Over half of the adult male inmates are more aptly seen a:
from New York City come from fourteen districts in the Bronx, Man- these areas than as orig:
hattan, and Brooklyn, even though men in those areas make up just 17 criticize violence in ra:
percent of the city’s total population. Numbers like these inspired the black communities is 0:
Justice Mapping Center to examine prison spending by neighborhood sis on individual (deco:
and by city block. Center founders Eric Cadora and Charles Swartz denial of larger social :
discovered what they dubbed “million-dollar blocks,” neighborhoods contexts.

--- Page 19 ---
Hip Hop Causes Violence 51
where “so many residents were sent to state prison that the total cost of
their incarceration will be more than $1] million dollars.” In Brooklyn
alone, there were thirty-five such blocks. Rates of incarceration among
black women have also risen dramatically and disproportionately. Al-
most half of the female prison population are black, and many of these
women are locked up for nonviolent offenses (theft, forgery, prostitu-
tion, and drugs) that are directly linked to the forces of community de-
struction addressed in this chapter. The community-wide impact of
these disproportionate and racially specific levels of policing and incar-
ceration is staggering."

These are the architectural signposts of today’s ghettos. The vio-
lence that takes place within them has been created not only by racial
discrimination long ago but also by assaults on poor black communi-
ties since the 1960s. The high levels of crime, police brutality,
violence, drugs, and instability that define poor black urban commu-
nities are the direct result of chronic and high levels of concentrated
joblessness, loss of affordable housing, community demolition, the
crack explosion, the impact of easily accessible and highly deadly
weapons used to defend the lucrative drug trade, and incarceration
strategies that have criminalized large swaths of the African-American
population. While not all of these factors were unique to poor black
urban America, some were, and others were highly concentrated
there. These recent conditions, along with compounding factors such
as the long-term effects of economic, social, and political forms of
racial discrimination, intensified the dramatic demise of working-class
and poor black urban communities.

| Hip hop emerged in this context, and thus the tales of drug deal-
| ing, pimping, petty crime, dropping out of school, and joining a gang
, are more aptly seen as reflections of the violence experienced in
these areas than as origins of the violence. The drive to point out and
criticize violence in rappers’ stories as the cause of violence in poor
: black communities is often a disgraceful extension of the overempha-
2 sis on individual (decontextualized) personal behavior and the deep
! denial of larger social responsibility for creating and fostering these
5 contexts.

--- Page 20 ---
52 THE HIP HOP WARS =
The violent stories that characterize many hip hop lyrics are tales dence that people are di
from this landscape, told from the ground-level perspective of circum- the social conditions ir
stances as lived experience, not historical or sociological analysis. growing up in secure ar
When we understand the depths of this reality, the actual destruction violence- or crime-ridder
and violence that these societally manufactured conditions have fos- ing criminal and violent
tered, then the violent lyrics take on a different character. a large part of the surrou-
Why is it so difficult to understand that this highly vulnerable we are treated in violer:
and dismantled community of chronically poor and racially- survive in places where «
discriminated-against young people is in need of protection and advo- and if we consume mar.
cacy? Why are we turning youth (through attacks on rap) into the only for exhibiting highe:
agents of their own demise, seeing black kids as the source of violence tant, for experiencing le:
in America while denying the extraordinary violence done to them? greater need for selfprots
My foregoing summary of the five causes of destruction of black So, hip hop’s extensiv:
communities—chronic joblessness, loss of affordable housing, drug- drugs, crime, and priso~
trade expansion, automatic weapons and the drug economy, and incar- who have little or no ot
ceration instead of rehabilitation —is not meant to encourage a blithe troubled neighborhood:
reaction to violent stories in hip hop, nor to cause readers to say, more powerful in this cc:
“Well, this is their reality.” The prevalence of such stories in hip hop ties that can overemphas:
and the fact that they too often valorize violence (sometimes even places face. On behalf <-
serving as seductive tales of predatory action against other poor black ously from afar, we shou.
people) are signs of a crisis for which the nation as a whole is respon- street crime and the drug
sible; the stories and rhymes themselves are not the primary source of resent the infusion of vic.
the crisis. Attacking the rappers individually—calling them thugs sound an alarm about t=
and criminals while studiously avoiding the state of poor black urban by policies, public opinic
America, or, worse, blaming these conditions entirely or even prima- We must pay close atte
rily on black people themselves—is a disturbing aspect of the hip hop not treat the tales of violz
wars. This stance reflects a long-term drive to deny the continued the many crucial conte:
power and influence of institutional racism, sustains a racialized “us” taking the violence exp7:
versus “them” philosophy that enables the maintenance of racial and examining them out of ¢ -
class inequality, and, in effect, extends the very logic that drove many both for the art form az:
of these mean-spirited and disempowering urban policies in the first the larger nonblack cul=:
place. but, worse, these reasozs
Culture is a means by which we learn how to engage with the So, the issue, once dec:
world, and thus constant depictions of violence can have a normative cultural problem, not vi:
effect. While this effect is not direct and absolute, there is ample evi- consequences for the rm:

--- Page 21 ---
i. is
Hip Hop Causes Violence 53
= tales dence that people are deeply influenced by their surroundings and
cum- the social conditions impinging on them. Compared to children
“LLVsIs. growing up in secure and stable environments, those who live in
ction violence- or crime-ridden communities are at greater risk for exhibit-
= fos- ing criminal and violent behavior.’ Our visually mediated culture is
a large part of the surroundings and social conditions that shape us. If
erable we are treated in violent ways, if we are forced by circumstance to
cially- survive in places where violent conflict is a matter of everyday life,
- advo- and if we consume many violent images, we are more at risk—not
<> the only for exhibiting higher levels of violent behavior but, more impor-
7 ance tant, for experiencing less trust and intimacy, increased fear, and a
acti greater need for self-protection.
- Slack So, hip hop’s extensive repertoire of stories about violence, guns,
. drug- drugs, crime, and prison is compounded by everyday life for those
iear- who have little or no option but to reside in the poorest and most
-alithe troubled neighborhoods and communities. Such stories become
23 say, more powerful in this context, providing an image of everyday reali-
22> hop ties that can overemphasize the worst of what young people in these
= even places face. On behalf of these kids, not the ones who listen vicari-
- dlack ously from afar, we should be concerned about how and how often
‘=spon- street crime and the drug trade are depicted —not because they rep-
=o Gt resent the infusion of violence in American culture but because they
_ tugs sound an alarm about the levels of violence and social decay created
urban by policies, public opinion, and neglect.
>rima- We must pay close attention to violence in hip hop, but we should
<p hop not treat the tales of violence in hip hop in dangerous isolation from
cnued the many crucial contexts for its existence. Decontextualization—
2 “us” taking the violence expressed in hip hop lyrics and storytelling and
-al and examining them out of context—has a number of problematic effects
= any both for the art form and for black people in general. Not only are
ne first the larger nonblack cultural reasons for these violent themes ignored
but, worse, these reasons are attributed to black people themselves.
-ch the So, the issue, once decontextualized, becomes violence as a black
native cultural problem, not violence as a larger social problem with tragic
2.€ evi- consequences for the most vulnerable. This approach does nothing

--- Page 22 ---
54 THE HIP HOP WARS 1:
to help us think through and reduce violence in black communities and videos), which only
or in American society more broadly, nor to reduce our collective ap- nition of cross-racial exar
petite for violent entertainment or our use of violence as a means to These factors, when ¢:
achieve success and secure opportunity. It does, however, contribute thing like this: We supp
to the further targeting and criminalization of poor black youth; it and communities with ;
helps us imagine that this is “their problem,” which only “they” can lence. Then, we relv o-
fix by acting right. men as more violent, fez:
Another negative effect of taking hip hop’s lyrical tales of violence violence in response, wh
out of social context is that their distinctive style of expression over- incarceration. Next, bec
shadows all similarities between them and other styles of violent sto- the stories they tell abo:
rytelling. Because the particular brand of poor urban black and expression,” which acti».
Latino male street culture that many rappers detail in their rhymes is expands the market for <
unfamiliar to many whites (who because of continued patterns of res- which, in turn, confirm:
idential segregation do not live in these overwhelmingly black and lent. This creates coonc-
brown neighborhoods), these unfamiliar listeners often equate black ing violent storytelling. 5
style of expression with content. Although tales of violent street cul- But whet te the actos
ture have various ethnic and racial origins, the fascination with black people who live in cor:
versions of such street culture creates the illusion that violent street af veal Giolenca? Are ©
culture is itself a black cultural thing. shapes their lives—st2-
Poor white ethnic neighborhoods have long had their own forms of crime about which the
violent street culture, but the fact that their slang, style, and rhetoric nd express), excl wees
are not generally perceived as racially distinctive contributes to the young people manage -
misreading of black street crime and street culture as a cultural mat- stories (a well-known 7:
ter rather than as an outgrowth of larger social patterns. This lack of logical circles)? Do ne
local familiarity with black style among white fans adds to the allure young people experier.::
of its expression in hip hop. It also encourages a false sense of black growth of the day-to-dz:
ownership of street culture and crime among blacks. Thus, black lan- or Teduee actual cig’ =
guage, clothing, and other distinctions in style override the deep sim- metaphor?
ilarities between black and other ethnic (white and nonwhite) forms Or ean. hod: be tome
of violent street culture. The lack of regular day-to-day contact be- eouelfon weal atte ee
tween races (facilitated by sustained housing and school segregation) the problem is this: A:
enhances this miscue. Many white fans come to “know” these neigh- overly violent day-to-cz
borhoods and their residents through mass media portraits (Holly- pect of everyday life =>
wood film, television programming, news coverage, rap music lyrics, efforts?

--- Page 23 ---
oo
Hip Hop Causes Violence 35
e and videos), which only reinforce the fixation and reduce the recog-
- nition of cross-racial examples of violent male street cultures.
= These factors, when taken together, create a web that looks some-
e thing like this: We support policies that destroy black communities,
at and communities with great instability often experience more vio-
a lence. Then, we rely on long-standing racist perceptions of black
men as more violent, fear them more, and then treat them with more
2 violence in response, which results in both more violence and more
as incarceration. Next, because we associate these men with violence,
te the stories they tell about violence are perceived as “authentic black
d expression,” which activates a familiar kind of racial voveurism and
8 expands the market for their particular stories of crime and violence,
Se which, in turn, confirms the perception that black men are more vio-
d lent. This creates economic opportunity for performing and celebrat-
ox ing violent storytelling. Round and round we go.
|. But what is the actual role of violence in lyrics written by young
ck people who live in communities that are struggling to stem the tide
et of real violence? Are these lyrics celebrations of the violence that
shapes their lives—statements in support of the gangs, drugs, and
ot crime about which they rap and rhyme? Or do they reflect a process
fs of emotional and social management—a means by which these
ne young people manage the lived reality of violence by telling their
at stories (a well-known process of healing in therapeutic and psycho-
at logical circles)? Do these stories contribute to the violence these
fe young people experience? Or are their stories about violence an out-
ck growth of the day-to-day threats they face, and do such stories relieve
a or reduce actual violence by responding to real violence with
“a metaphor?
oats Or can both be true? Can violent lyrics and imagery reflect a real
Dee condition and at the same time contribute to creating it? The nub of
a the problem is this: At what point do stories that emanate from an
n- overly violent day-to-day life begin to encourage and support that as-
a pect of everyday life and undercut the communities’ anti-violent
23, efforts?

--- Page 24 ---
56 THE HIP HOP WARS E
The question remains as to how we should examine and respond to realize what they’re doi
the images and stories about violence that emanate from people who ing the drugs, they don
live in communities plagued by violence. We must continue to discuss you mature, and then v
whether we should attack the lyrics and the lyricists as causing vio- destruction around th
lence or the conditions that foster violence. Clearly, we should chal- highly commercially st
lenge artists who have profited handsomely by constantly reinforcing that de-glamorize the d:
the worst forms of predatory behavior against poor black communi- humanize black people
ties. But to do so while denying the reality of their circumstances is sions of violence and
mean-spirited and ineffectual. They do not publicly re
In the song “Trouble” on the CD Kingdom Come (Roc-A-Fella to “project humanist.”
Records, 2006), Jay-Z raps about his desire to stop hustling, but says bration go to the game.
he’s only “pretending to be different,” praying to god, in the chorus, of taking advantage of +
because he’ll never change. Both his longing to change and the Without making over
bravado that accompanies his return to the game heighten the im- the creativity in hip he
pact of the song. Jay-Z, a consummate braggadocio-style rapper, that offers little critique
reestablishes his dominance over all around him. At one point he brilliant stories in hip k
raps: “The meek shall perish.” He goes on to say, “I'll roof you little ing with violence but ¢
nigga, I’m a project terrorist.” His unrepentant character (self?) brags ple, the lyrics for Nas’s *
about being a person who rules with violent disregard and terrorizes and seemingly perman:
people who live in the projects, an already terrorizing place to be. tales are a decreasing =
How should black poor people respond to this character? With serving instead as “alter:
pride? Affirmatively? Supportively? Since the song does not offer a of the most financially
critique of this “project terrorist,” and given the charisma that Jay-Z. Cent, T.L., and Lil We:
imparts through his rhymes, one could perceive it as a glorification of rify violent tales and z
a person terrorizing the most vulnerable members of black American They no longer tell taiz
society and demanding that we support his creative rights to profit tributing to a devaluing
from it. Why aren't street-level rappers like Jay-Z fashioning count- ered youth. Instead. =
less tales of vouthful outrage at such a predator? This is a powerful exploitation of black su=
example of how the art of bragging wedded to the icon of the violent Despite the wrong->.
street hustler—in communities where street hustling is a vibrant and geted claims about hip :
destructive force—ends up having the power to celebrate predatory them. It is silly to clair:
behavior. pate in has no impact <:
In a 2007 Rolling Stone interview, Jay-Z acknowledged that the society turns a blind eve -
drug wars of which he was a part are hostile to black people and politics to be saturated :-
black communities: “When dealers are in the middle of it, they don’t its citizenry and perhaps

--- Page 25 ---
oo”
Hip Hop Causes Violence o¢
ad to realize what they're doing, they don’t humanize the people that’s us-
‘ho ing the drugs, they don’t humanize the neighborhood. It’s not until
SOUSS you mature, and then you look back on it like, “I was causing a lot of
- yj0- destruction around the neighborhood.”* But where are all the
chal- highly commercially successful lyrics that make this crucial point,
=i that de-glamorize the drug trade, that reject gangsta worldviews, that
~ini- humanize black people? This is the central problem with the expres-
“25 is sions of violence and drug-dealer-turned-rapper stories in hip hop:
They do not publicly reinforce the transition from “project terrorist”
Fella to “project humanist.” Far too much pleasure, fame, style, and cele-
= says bration go to the game, to the hustle, to the dehumanizing rhetoric
rus, of taking advantage of black people.
- the Without making overly blanket, ill-informed generalizations about
= im- the creativity in hip hop, we need to be alarmed about storytelling
aie that offers little critique of violence against black people. ‘There are
-- he brilliant stories in hip hop that capture the day-to-day reality of deal-
‘ittle ing with violence but do not seem to glorify it. Consider, for exam-
rags ple, the lyrics for Nas’s “Gangsta Tears,” which tap into the pain, loss,
TIZeS and seemingly permanent cycle of retribution. But such sorrowful
> be. tales are a decreasing proportion of what sells records in hip hop,
With serving instead as “alternative” fare on corporate radio. Far too many
“era of the most financially successful lyricists in hip hop—Jay-Z, 50
‘aad, Cent, T.I., and Lil’ Wayne, among others—overemphasize and glo-
-nof tify violent tales and gang personas because these are profitable.
-iean They no longer tell tales from the darkside, with the hopes of con-
>rofit tributing to a devaluing of “the life” and producing radical, empow-
sant ered youth. Instead, there is too much getting tich from the
ertul exploitation of black suffering.
lent Despite the wrong-headed, decontextualized, and unfairly tar-
- and geted claims about hip hop causing violence, there is some truth to
tory them. It is silly to claim that what we consume, witness, and partici-
pate in has no impact on us as individuals and as a society. When a
:* the society turns a blind eye to violent behavior and allows its culture and
> and politics to be saturated in violence, it will normalize violence among
=on’t its citizenry and perhaps also indirectly contribute to violent behavior
/ ee ~

--- Page 26 ---
58 THE HIP HOP WARS Hi
among some of its citizens. And if we are going to rail about violence violent social spaces that
in hip hop, we should rail twice as hard about the depths of violence pect them not to valorize
young black people experience, seeing them as the recipients and in- Some of this impact is
heritors of violence rather than solely as its perpetrators. Where is all question should be voc
the media-supported outrage about this? people do not need “pre

The combination of denial of the larger forces and the self dollar blocks” are bad €:
congratulatory story of hyper-individual responsibility most readily black people (and to m.
expressed by white middle-class leaders is more than dishonest; it is and profitable blackness
itself a form of social violence against the young people who are most tricky. But we must cont:
vulnerable and who need all of us to make a real and serious commit- Our efforts to support, s-
ment to restoring the kinds of institutions and opportunities that keep permanently join the f
chaos, violence, and social root shock at bay. The refusal to acknowl- above to their individua.
edge our national culpability for these conditions continues not only responsibility nor indivic
the legacy of denying the deep injuries done to African-Americans isolation. Focusing on ©.
but also the long-standing use of the expression of black pain from sponsible as defending ::
these injuries as “evidence” of black people’s own responsibility for cation for perpetuating 2
these larger circumstances. The depths of the commercial success as- lifestyles in the music. [
sociated with violent, gang, and street culture as “authentic” hip hop the hip hop wars propz
has given violent black masculinity a seal of approval, thus encourag- selves violent, and bot!
ing these behaviors among the kids who are most at risk, and who seem to accept the larz:
“need” to embrace this model if manhood is to survive. What began American society to chs:
as a form of releasing and healing has become yet another lucrative Unbiased, socially i:
but destructive economy for young poor black men. do focus on directly b=

The day-to-day violence that plagues poor communities must be than pointing the finge-
taken into account both as a crucial context for explaining some of cause. Working as ma:
what we hear in hip hop and as a reality that compounds the power the communities most =
of violent storytelling. The allure of celebrities whose cachet depends of daily violence, acti:
partly on their relationship to a criminal/drug underworld is surely a policing but, on the ¢::
form of social idolization that might encourage already-vulnerable flict resolution in sche -
kids to participate in the lucrative drug trade in neighborhoods where dren spend a great dez.
good-paying jobs are nearly nonexistent. A good deal of 50 Cent’s ini- resources for families =:
tial promotional campaign relied on the fact that he sold crack, that vouth crimes should =
his mother was a crack user, that he was shot nine times and wore a ing and other highly s=:
bulletproof vest to protect him against enemies. We can’t constantly rection, not placeme>-
make violence sexy for young people who find themselves mired in facilities.

--- Page 27 ---
3
Hip Hop Causes Violence 59
<< violence violent social spaces that are mostly not of their making and then ex-
-= violence pect them not to valorize violent action.
=cs and in- Some of this impact is going to be behavioral, and the behaviors in
‘rere is all question should be vociferously challenged and rejected. Black
people do not need “project terrorists”! The projects and “million-
= the self dollar blocks” are bad enough. Of course, the drive to pathologize
ost readily black people (and to make pathologized blackness the only “true”
nest; it is and profitable blackness) makes such criticism of black behavior very
~> are most tricky. But we must confront this dilemma with courage and honesty.
<5 commit- Our efforts to support, sustain, and rebuild black communities must
-s tnat keep permanently join the five major causes of destruction I’ve listed
. acknowl- above to their individual and collective consequences. Neither social
=: not only responsibility nor individual responsibility should be talked about in
Americans isolation. Focusing on hip hop as a cause of violence is just as irre-
>ain from sponsible as defending it by pointing to social conditions as a justifi-
sc 3ility for cation for perpetuating gang, gun, and drug slang, iconography, and
ACCESS aS- lifestyles in the music. Despite the finger pointing, both positions in
= Aip hop the hip hop wars propagate the myth that black people are them-
=. courag- selves violent, and both downplay the violence done to them. Both
. and who seem to accept the larger social context as it is; neither challenges
- at began American society to change the playing field.
7 sucrative Unbiased, socially just forms of concern about violence will and
do focus on directly helping communities reduce violence rather
=: must be than pointing the finger at and railing about lyrics and images as the
“£ some of cause. Working as many local leaders and community groups do in
“.€ power the communities most directly affected by street crime and other acts
21 cepends of daily violence, activists don’t advocate more force, violence, and
5 surely a policing but, on the contrary, strongly advocate for nonviolent con-
“unerable flict resolution in schools, at home, and in other places where chil-
_:ds where dren spend a great deal of their time. They also call for access to
vent's ini- resources for families to help resolve conflict. Indeed, our response to
-zack, that youth crimes should result in extensive conflict resolution counsel-
sd wore a ing and other highly supervised programs designed to reverse their di-
- onstantly rection, not placement in ever more violent adult incarceration
s mired in facilities.

--- Page 28 ---
60 THE HIP HOP WARS
The most effective way to enact concern over violence is to (1) ex-
press this concern for black youth, and the real violence they face, in Hi p H O p
the form of activist social change; and (2) stop being hypocritical
about violence. In other words, we must avoid the duplicity involved Dysfunctior
in expressing outrage at hip hop’s violence while remaining virtually
silent about the ways that our society condones violence and uses it
both as social policy (internationally and at home) and as entertain-
ment. This effort would have to address head-on the social worlds
this nation has formed by creating, maintaining, and exacerbating
the conditions in ghettos. It would have to confront violence against What is unique about th:
black youth—direct and indirect—that is part of everyday life but all tis pornagarhy? the se
too often goes unchallenged as a crisis for our society unless it spills ea rican American *
out of the ghetto. Until this happens, those who rail about hip hop’s Tg
: . . cused of generalization. -
violence but refuse to take into account the forces working against ia .
- ; scribing rap music «
these communities do so not on behalf of the thousands of kids and . -
paraphrasing the come
young ails who have been left to fend for themselves but, rather, critic, Bill Cosby.)
inst them.
i - —David Yerushalmi, p
Americans for Nation:
Spectator, April 27, 201
established conservati
Americans for Natior::
a radical anti-Islamic «
The solution to pover:.
movement. It lies in tre
people who dedicate t+
to improve their circu:
tunities for their childre:
of African-Americans is °
—Mark Goldblatt, Th:
October 17, 2005
I aint saying Jesse ~:
[Stringer] are gold-dizz
mount a legitimate car:
