--- Page 1 ---
3°n Was an ex-
sme. With jag-
~sacional ideas, a
-s:ental “Space ae EVE eae
~runk” cuts like ts ara AL SNe
—_——s THE HARDEST-WORKING MAN
ee IN SHOW BUSINESS
=25, DUL Ne was
= snowman and Ma, James Brown -
‘om. Texas who _—
. Detter, and put
JAMES BROWN is a concept, a vibration,
ctzer labels, he a dance. It’s not me, the man. JAMES BROWN
“oe : a is a freedom | created for humanity.
--castic things,
. —James Brown :
. L used to have
cme in from the
>2t you would
ses. In four James Brown was the most important musician to record for King Records—
3 The material the most important, most influential, most innovative, and most misunderstood.
=z Cooke-ish Brown was a musical revolutionary who changed the world. The influence of
>2 the material James Brown's music is universal at the beginning of the twenty-first century,
crs on King is One hears it in American hip hop, funk, and rock, the Afro-pop of Nigeria, Mali,
and other countries, Jamaican reggae, and in the playing of musicians from Japan
ove Me,’ “Cold, to Sweden. Among American musicians of the twentieth century, probably only
Tzelettes. The Louis Armstrong and Elvis Presley had a comparable impact,
:- 3 the Chance James Brown was King’s biggest seller. Indeed, for the last several years of King’s
223i “T Sart existence, Brown's hits kept the company afloat. Among those hits were “Please,
esharwoule Please, Please” and “Try Me” in the early days, and such later ground-shaking
singles as “Papa's Got a Brand New Bag,’"I Got You (I Feel Good),” and “Cold
“en and then. Sweat.”
—. This second Brown's recording career was monumental, From 1956 through 1988, Brown
zasy as well 2s had ninety-eight records on the Top 40 R&B singles chart in Billboard, a record
nos snexpectes unsurpassed by any other artist. He had seventeen Number One R&B singles,
2 “Hook Me a total topped only by Louis Jordan and Stevie Wonder and equaled by Aretha
= ted on stece Franklin,
i ers renner ‘The impact of James Brown was obscured somewhat at the time by the British
Invasion and Motown soul music, but perspective has shown that Brown's records

--- Page 2 ---
164. ® KING OF THE QUEEN CITY @ @ THE HARDEST-@
of the 1960s were the blueprint for the future. Brown not only birthed funk and floyd Scott, Assuming tha: ==>
soul music, he also made them popular. Appearing on such television programs name to the Famous Flare: = -
as the Ed Sullivan Show, Shindig, the Tonight Show, Where the Action Is, and the who kidded Brown, “Y'all z-: -
Mike Douglas Show, Brown took the heavy funk into America’s living rooms. before you were famous.”=

At atime when other black artists were cleaning up their music for white con- Syd Nathan hated “Please. > _-
sumption, Brown took his music in the opposite direction, back to its black church to humiliate Ralph Bass wher --
roots. His mighty buzz saw of a voice, among the roughest and rawest in R&B, when Billboard gave it a poss:
was patterned after two of his gospel music idols, Julius Cheeks of the Sensational fervor runs through the p:ez: ~
Nightingales and Reuben Willingham of the Swanee Quintet. Brown's fans, black let off plenty of steam.”?
and white, reacted to his music with a fervor rarely seen outside church, The record received a —z:--

Brown ruled the R&B charts during his time on King. He recorded the first WLAC in Nashville, bege= a 3
million-selling R&B album, Live at the Apollo, one of the greatest concert record- at the station.“ We had a 2'z ---
ings of all time. He upstaged Mick Jagger in a film called The T.A.M.I. Show and room,’ Allen said,“I just herses
shook up Frankie Avalon in Ski Party. He helped calm America in the fiery days Flames, It didn’t mean arv7=:-z
after the murder of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. For all of that, perhaps the sur- you know, and I said, ‘Ok. —~ %
est sign of his greatness was that when James Brown proclaimed himself “Soul that night. Within two week: >
Brother Number One,’ nobody argued. “Please, Please, Please” 72: = >

James Brown had it rough from the start. He was born dead. Stillborn on May next nine singles flopped. Nzz>=
3, 1933, the tiny body was set aside in the one-room shack a few miles outside metcial viability, particula-~ -_ ;
Barnwell, South Carolina. An older relative, Aunt Minnie, refused to give up. it's worth, Nathan wasn’t «<r: -- ;
Finally, after several minutes of her attention, the baby let out a loud cry. He was made the Top 40 of the 22: 2
alive after all. The boy was named after his father Joe, but for some reason James” label, but a plaintive baliz= ag”
was thrown in, too, so the name went into the books as James Joe Brown Jr. Before presenting “T=... /: +

Brown's parents split up when he was four, and after a short time with his his original song and krew --=
father, James was shipped off to live with an aunt who ran a brothel in Augusta, rejected it out of hand.“?— --~
Georgia. At seven, James was buck-dancing in the street for nickels and dimes. Brown,” who offered to Be os
He was about twelve when he drifted into petty crime. Arrested at fifteen for time and musicians and ==- -~ -
breaking and entering, he was sentenced to eight to sixteen years in prison. He sense,’ and he didn't wanz :+-:- 2
served three years, mostly in the small Georgia town of Toccoa. when he left.

Brown turned to music after his release in 1952. He joined a group in Toccoa that Brown then had a feve =--_=. -
sang both gospel and the R&B hits of the day. The group, which would develop the disc jockeys he knew. Kies 2
into the Famous Flames, worked local gigs, gradually earning a solid reputation. King—for a record that c:2-- ==
Brown had largely taken over the lead singing duties by the time the group worked more than 20,000 recorz: —: :
up a demo in 1955 of “Please, Please, Please,’ a fervent remake of the Orioles’ hit decided to give the song ac ir
“Baby Please Don't Go.’ This crude little recording was the demo on which Ralph the song. On Nathan's di: <-_.
Bass bet his career. Re-recorded in Nover--:- .=:

The group that went to Cincinnati with Brown for that first session included hit. The success allowed =--<- =
singers Bobby Byrd, Johnny Terry, Sylvester Keels, Nash Knox, and guitarist Na- manager), Ben Bart of U=>:— a

--- Page 3 ---
© THE HARDEST-WORKING MAN IN SHOW BUSINESS e 165
floyd Scott. Assuming that they would soon be famous, they changed the group
name to the Famous Flames, a move that reportedly cracked up Little Richard,
who kidded Brown, “Yall are the onliest people who made yourselves famous
before you were famous.”

Syd Nathan hated “Please, Please, Please” but released the single anyway, mainly
to humiliate Ralph Bass when it failed. The first sign of the record's potential came
when Billboard gave it a positive review, noting astutely that “A dynamic, religious
fervor runs through the pleading solo here. Brown and the Famous Flames group
let off plenty of steam.”

‘The record received a major boost when Bill “Hoss” Allen, a disc jockey on
WLAC in Nashville, began playing it. Allen found the single in a box of rejects
at the station.“ We had a big box of records that were discards in our little music
room,’ Allen said.“I just happened to pull this out. James Brown and the Famous
Flames. It didn’t mean anything to me. J put it on, and it came to ‘please, please,
you know, and I said, ‘Oh, my lord. This has got to be a hit’ I started playing it
that night. Within two weeks, it was a hit.”

“Please, Please, Please” was a big R&B hit, particularly in the south, but Brown's
next nine singles flopped. Nathan continued to have doubts about Brown's com-
mercial viability, particularly his ability to appeal to white record buyers. For what
its worth, Nathan wasn't wrong about that—none of Brown's first sixteen singles
made the Top 40 of the pop charts. Nathan was ready to drop Brown from the
label, but a plaintive ballad called “Try Me” saved Brown's career.

Before presenting “Try Me” to Nathan, Brown had thoroughly road-tested
his original song and knew that it caused pandemonium at his shows. Nathan
rejected it out of hand. “I’m not spending my money on that garbage,” he told
Brown,°* who offered to pay for the session himself. Brown booked the studio
time and musicians and cut the song. Nathan still hated it, said it didn’t “make
sense,’ and he didn’t want it for his company.° So Brown took the tape with him
when he left.

Brown then had a few copies of the record pressed and took them around to
the disc jockeys he knew, When WLAC started playing it, the orders flooded into
King—for a record that didn't exist. Nathan held firm until the orders represented
more than 20,000 records. He then called Brown and said, “Well, James, I’ve
decided to give the song a try’” Brown thanked him, but insisted on re-recording
the song, On Nathan's dime this time.

Re-recorded in November 1958,“ Try Me’ was Brown's first number one R&B
hit. The success allowed Brown to hire a high-powered booking agent (and later
manager), Ben Bart of Universal Attractions. Even better, it allowed Brown to

--- Page 4 ---
166 ® KING OF THE QUEEN CITY @ © THE HARDES~-
begin working with his own band. These were huge steps in the trip from James doing the camel walk acres: -»
Brown to JAMES BROWN. had to be a better way to cz a i
Under the direction of bandleaders Lucas “Fats” Gonder, Pee Wee Ellis, and a three-minute single. :
Fred Wesley, the James Brown Band (aka the JBs) grew into a mighty force, be- After a few more heated z->_-
coming by the mid-1960s probably the hottest performing band on the planet. that if he wanted to do 2-5 nd
Players came and went, but some made indelible marks, including Clyde Seub- Brown's eternal credit, he —_ >
blefield, Melvin Parker, John “Jabo” Starks (drums); Jimmy Nolen, “Country” the project himself. :
Kellum, Phelps “Catfish” Collins (guitar); Maceo Parker, St. Clair Pinckney
(saxophones); Bernard Odum, William “Bootsy” Collins (bass); and Waymon
Reed (trumpet). “For moments he s==—=: °
As Alan Leeds, former tour director for Brown, pointed out, “Prior to the moving. He cruises 27-22 ~
mid-1970s, artists didn't ‘tour’—they worked. Big stars like James Brown had the SO Oe eee Tapia “a
‘luxury’ of working often.”* Thanks to a string of R&B hits from 1959 through 1961 i burn names iw r= Sally
that included “I'll Go Crazy,” “Think,” “You've Got the Power,’ “I Don't Mind,’ was too busy s~ @ cS
“Bewildered, “Baby You're Right,’ and“Lost Someone,’ Brown worked constantly. —Nibisorstesese
He had become “The Hardest Working Man in Show Business.” -
“Arenas, theatres, stadiums, night clubs,’ Leeds says, “the James Brown Show ‘The Apollo Theatre, on ::<-- =-
played them all, fifty-one weeks of the year... We carried a single truck for uni- portant music venue in tz ::::
forms, musical instruments, a modest audio system, and a lone strobe light. The the pinnacle for an R&B rz—: —,
only microphones were for vocals and horns . . . Yet night after night, we tore the on its stage. Apollo audiex:: y:
roof off whatever venue we were in.” be impressed but merciless := ---
“We crisscrossed the country year round,” wrote Fred Wesley, “making stops Browns grand experimerz. =: -
in most cities twice a year. We only slowed down long enough to record or play be Soul Brother Number C-:
theaters. Most theaters were on the East Coast: the Royal in Baltimore, the How- Brown rented the Apolic T>==
ard in Washington, the Regal in Chicago, the Uptown in Philadelphia, and the He planned to record the s=---_
Apollo in New York City. Theater stints were three-to-five day stops. All other had caught Brown's enthus:z:— --
gigs were one-nighters. The only other time the bus stopped was to record.” alive album could happen, sz = =
In 1962, Brown got the idea to record one of his concerts and release it on a him gamble on the whole z_. -- 1
full-length album. Predictably, Nathan hit the ceiling, explaining in a loud and When Nathan realized --:- = -
profane manner why the idea was crazy: King was a singles-oriented company; his own expense, he commi=z:2 *-
Brown was a singles-oriented artist who had cracked the pop Top 40 only once; president who had joined X--- :
black people didn’t buy albums; white people who bought albums had never heard engineer Chuck Seitz flew !- +: -
of James Brown; radio stations would have a hard time fitting an album into their recording the performances.
playlists; and there wouldn't be any hit singles. By show time, fifteen huzz-::
But Brown held firm, for he had his reasons, too. He knew there was a dispar- After a florid introduction &e— =<
ity between his record sales and the hysteria his show caused night after night pounded out some of the mes- =~.
in city after city. The show really did blow the roof off most nights. People had chords on “T'll Go Crazy” ziz-_-
never seen anything like it—trumpet players doing flips, the whole band doing Train.” It’s a thrilling roller-c- iit
intricate, choreographed routines, the Famous Flames singing and dancing, Brown blaring horns, screaming auc?=--:

--- Page 5 ---
® THE HARDEST-WORKING MAN IN SHOW BUSINESS e 167
ae doing the camel walk across the stage while screaming out his latest hit. There
had to be a better way to capture the excitement of the James Brown Show than
ae a three-minute single.
2 See After a few more heated arguments on the subject, Nathan finally told Brown
sess, that if he wanted to do a “live” album so much, he should pay for it himself. To
ase Browns eternal credit, he again put his money where his mouth was and financed
ase the project himself.
=~ vas
“For moments he seemed motionless at center stage. Then Brown was
2 fe moving. He cruised across the Apollo stage on a cushion of air, his black
- 35 shoes skating rapidly. When he fell to his knees, microphone cradled in
= Gree his hands, | was frightened. Was he sick? Did he have a headache?
eee ! turned to ask my mother what was bothering James Brown, but she
ae was too busy smiling and bopping to the music to notice me”"
eee ~Nelson George, from “‘Right on!’ to ‘Word Up!’” StarTime
Gf age ‘The Apollo Theatre, on 125th Street in Harlem, was black America’s most im-
— portant music venue in the 1950s and 1960s. The Apollo was the ultimate peak,
hg the pinnacle for an R&B performer. Careers and reputations were made and lost
ae on its stage. Apollo audiences were legendarily tough judges of talent, ready to
be impressed but merciless to those who failed the test. It was a perfect place for
ese Brown's grand experiment. If he could pull this off, he would without question
cline: be Soul Brother Number One.
_— Brown rented the Apollo Theatre for six days of performances in October 1962.
Edks He planned to record the shows on the last day, Wednesday the 24th. The band
eviess had caught Brown's enthusiasm for the project.“He had a sincere, deep belief that
. a live album could happen,’ says St. Clair Pinckney.“That’s what drove him, made
5 Se 2 him gamble on the whole ball of wax.”
2 ag When Nathan realized that Brown was actually going ahead with the idea at
one his own expense, he committed King to the project. Hal Neely, the company vice
a president who had joined King in 1958, supervised the actual recording, King
ageed engineer Chuck Seitz flew in from Cincinnati to oversee the technical aspects of
seat recording the performances.
By show time, fifteen hundred devotees were more than ready to give it up.
— After a florid introduction from Fats Gonder, Brown and the band cut loose. They
wigee pounded out some of the most exciting R&B ever recorded, from the first guitar
er chords on “I'll Go Crazy” through a frenetic bebop-tinged workout on “Night
eae Train.’ It’s a thrilling roller-coaster ride of music—wild singing, precise playing,
— blaring horns, screaming audience, and Brown outdoing his own bad self,

--- Page 6 ---
168 © KING OF THE QUEEN CITY e THE HAFZEz~-mg
The show contains seven songs, connected by instrumental vamps that serve day to play the album es -==- _ ,
as a kind of theme. A razor-sharp version of “I'll Go Crazy” starts the show on lack of hit singles, radic s-:=--_ ,
a high note. “Try Me” demonstrates how effective Brown could have been as a treating the album as cw> ==. 4
gospel singer. “Think,” the old 5 Royales hit, comes next; Brown spits the lyrics out at New York's WWRL «= -- = ~~
at hyper speed, more beats than actual words. He uses his voice here as a rhythm thing through. People v-:-: _ ¥-m
instrument—not as a means to communicate verbally. It was a revolutionary idea Live at the Apollo mz: —_ cm
that Brown perfected by the end of the decade. today recognized as2cs:: =m
Ethnomusicologist Portia Maultsby says “listening to James Brown is listening ever recorded. It’s one 22 --. -=m
to a black preacher”? On “Try Me” and“I Don't Mind,” James and the Flames— and exciting. Snubbed 2---_ =
Bobby Byrd, Bobby Bennett, and Lloyd Stallworth—come together like a great buried in time capsules. =>: —m
gospel quartet, carrying the audience from peak to peak. The ten-minute version essential listening for 2-~:-: 2am
of “Lost Someone” is pure church—agony, ecstasy, sin, and redemption all rolled Notevena hot albu =: _- —zms
into one song. It is among Brown's finest performances. By the end of 1963, Brow-- - ay
The climax is a six-minute medley (sort of) that blends bits and pieces of songs, just had enough of Sy2.5- = om
mostly recent Brown hits, into a new song, It begins and ends with torrid chunks tack and all, He still cam2--~. vom
of “Please, Please, Please” and, in between, quotes from songs ranging from Bull Syd spent half the year it: - as
Moose Jackson's “I Love You (Yes I Do)” to “Bewildered.” It’s a strangely effective town, all hell would brzzx_:- 2.
a no reasoning between 22: =>
In Brown's autobiography, he remembers that the shows on the 24th got better Brown was frustrates =:~
as the day wore on.“ By the end of the last [show],” he wrote, “we had four reels of distribution system, once == - >.
tape. Mr. Neely was so excited he brought the master up to the dressing rooms and by the early 1960s. Brows 22> un
passed around the headphones for us to listen. None of us had ever heard ourselves year) and as much as k's :_: =
live like that. Jt sounded fantastic. We knew we really had something.“ not keeping pace with =:s =--.--_
Brown and company had reason to be proud. They had done the nearly impos- Though he was conr-e--_:-
sible, capturing, brilliantly and accurately, the visceral intensity and emotional independent production ::~-:ir
heights of a great concert performance. They had recorded a masterpiece, an album tions. At first, Fair Deal =z: . my
that would be hailed as a classic for decades to come. with other artists were S288 ae
Nathan trusted Neely’s judgment. Neely was raving about the tape, so Nathan Brown himself was receri:-- -~ 3
wanted in. Once again, Brown pointed out that because he had financed the Smash released seve-z" —
recording, he owned the tape. Once again, they argued. Once again, Nathan was You” and “It’s a Man's We-- —
over a barrel. As Brown wryly noted, “He hadn't even heard the tape and here he Brown releases. When <=: -_--
was already squabbling about it.”° Solomon: only King coz! rz 241
Released in January 1963 as The James Brown Show Live at the Apollo, the al- release only instrumenta.: =-: =m
bum was a hit of unprecedented magnitude. It sold more than a million copies, Nathan demanded the: 2--+~ 3
reportedly the first R&B album to do so, It was Brown's first hit album and the contract be renegotiated. C--:- _s
best-selling album in King’s history. The album made the Billboard pop album of new recordings by Browz *_- 24
chart, where it spent an unbelievable sixty-six weeks, It peaked at number two. with fake applause and cro> = =:
Radio did have a problem with the record—there weren't enough hours in the his best-selling artist.

--- Page 7 ---
@ THE HARDEST-WORKING MAN IN SHOW BUSINESS e 169
<i day to play the album as often as listeners demanded. As for the supposedly fatal
oo lack of hit singles, radio stations solved that by playing the album in its entirety,
22 treating the album as two fifteen-minute-long hit singles. Rocky G., a disc jockey
test at New York's WWRL at the time, says,“In the evening, we had to play the whole
= thing through. People were always calling in.”
fat Live at the Apollo made truckloads of money for King Records. The album is
today recognized as a classic, with many critics calling it the greatest “live” album
— ever recorded. It’s one of the very few albums from 1963 that still sounds fresh
— and exciting. Snubbed at that year’s Grammy Awards, the album has since been
pot buried in time capsules, shot into space, and played at millions of parties. It is
Agi essential listening for anyone interested in American music.
cat Not even a hot album could make for a peaceable Kingdom on Brewster Avenue.
By the end of 1963, Brown was ready to leave. According to Hal Neely, “James had
— just had enough of Syd. Syd at the time was growing more ill, with the heart at-
osu tack and all. He still came into work but what little patience he ever had was gone.
De. Syd spent half the year at a condo in Miami but when he would come back into
-- 5 town, all hell would break loose. It just came to a point where there was simply
no reasoning between the two.”
it Brown was frustrated not only with Nathan personally, but also with King's
es distribution system, once an innovative and effective operation but showing its age
i-+ by the early 1960s, Brown felt that for as much as he worked (roughly 300 days a
a: year) and as much as his audiences loved his music, his record sales were simply
not keeping pace with his growing stardom. It’s hard to disagree with him.
ee ‘Though he was contractually bound to King, Brown and Ben Bart formed an
oe independent production company in 1963, pointedly named Fair Deal Produc-
— tions. At first, Fair Deal was a vehicle through which Brown’s production efforts
with other artists were placed with Smash, a subsidiary of Mercury. By April 1964,
2 Brown himself was recording for Smash. As expected, Nathan sued.
ef Smash released several singles by Brown, including early versions of “I Got
=: You” and“Tt’s a Man's World,” before Nathan's suit forced Smash to hale all James
2: Brown releases. When the dust finally settled, it was a legal decision worthy of
Solomon: only King could release vocal records by Brown, whereas Smash could
Si release only instrumentals and James Brown's productions of other artists.
25.36 Nathan demanded that Brown honor his contract. Brown demanded that the
| he contract be renegotiated, Once again, Nathan was over the barrel; in the absence
~ = of new recordings by Brown, King had sunk to re-releasing“Please, Please, Please”
3 with fake applause and crowd noise added. Nathan simply couldn't afford to lose
ets his best-selling artist.

--- Page 8 ---
170 ® KING OF THE QUEEN CITY e ® THE HARDES7-ar
When Brown returned to King, he had a new deal worthy of one of America’s single in 1965. Finally releases --
major musical forces, a creatively structured ten-year personal services contract needed major postproductic= :_-
that guaranteed him a weekly payment of $1,500 and one of the highest royalty solos, speeded the tape up, 2i:::
rates in the industry. The publishing contracts were also restructured, a key point great bass line, cut the seven-—-:-z
in that Brown wrote or co-wrote most of his material. produced an instant classic --:- -
Most important, Brown, and not King Records, now owned his recordings, “Papa's Got a Brand New 2x2":
which gave Brown complete control over his recording career, something very and his first single co make === ->
few artists had at the time. Offices were created at the King complex for Brown's for “Best Rhythm & Blues Xz:
various business ventures, which included Try Me, a record label, and a publishing After “Brand New Bag” re>---
firm, Jim Jam Music. lowed with a string of hits <>:- -
“James Brown Productions was housed in a modest suite of offices adjacent to was “] Got You (I Feel Geri.
the King Records plant,’ remembered Alan Leeds.“ Working there proved to be the earlier record had bee-">-- ==.
just short of joining a cult. Nonperformers were expected to dress in conservative “This song is too hip, We're z2<.=
business suits and ties. Brown insisted that we all refer to each other by surname jazz. With the funk restoz22 --»
..« We were liable to be fined for the smallest of ‘infractions.”® amazingly, number three on =>: =:
So were the members of Brown's band. There were fines for unpolished shoes, “T's a Man's Man’s Man's “3. ==
bad haircuts, missed cues on-stage, and, the ultimate, not being able to recite of pace. Lushly orchestrarez. :-: -
the current set list, song by song, within a mandated time. If a gaffe happened Smash. The song was writce=. =~ =
on stage, punishment was immediate and delivered by Brown himself: “Td mash from the Bible... I don’t ss: ;
potatoes [one of his signature dance steps] over to where the person whod messed has a place, a man has a piace. --:
up could see me and I'd flash my open hand once for each $5 fine-—five times for he has the first word or the =-- + -
a $25 fine, and so on. I did it right on the beat of the music so it looked like part ‘The record was pretty >:=:—:
of the act’? strange, the feel of the sonz —:. 7
‘The bus carrying the James Brown Band made few unscheduled stops. It stopped didn’t come from papa's —" =e
only to record, which is why the band was at Arthur“Guitar Boogie” Smith's studio entered the pop Top Ten.
in Charlotte, North Carolina, one February night in 1965. The band was on its Brown's next R&B che------—--
way to a gig somewhere and Brown wanted to get his newest idea down on tape. bandleader Pee Wee Ellis. 2-:+-
They played for just under an hour and then got back on the bus and rolled down that, with their current his s- <2:
the road. The new song was called “Papa's Got a Brand New Bag.” group Dyke and the Blaze-: - =: -
It was to be Brown's first new single for King in over a year, but what Brown Soul Brother Number Ore =-=:, |
submitted was an unedited seven-minute take, a relaxed and extended vamp with According to Ellis, “Celi > + +2
two solos by sax player Maceo Parker, one on tenor and one on baritone. Ron Len- dressing room after a gig. =: ra
hoff, the chief engineer at King who worked extensively with Brown, remembers the rhythm down ona piece -? =m
it well: “The original tape was so bad—muffled—that when Syd Nathan heard I made some sort of graph: == 3 7x
it, he exclaimed, ‘My God, I can’t put that out’ I had to edit it and [equalize] it arrangement from his notes :-.: ca
section by section, It took two days.’ was recorded in May 196: >: xa
Despite Brown's confident “This is a hit” at the beginning of the song, the Engineer Ron Lenhoff rz::_. --e
original version of “Papa's Got a Brand New Bag” would never have been a hit dards. “For ‘Cold Sweat;” ss: Lia

--- Page 9 ---
® THE HARDEST-WORKING MAN IN SHOW BUSINESS @ I7I
merica’s single in 1965. Finally released in 1991, the cut is both brilliant and radical—but it
etumeniey needed major postproduction surgery to become a hit. Lenhoff cut out both sax
> rovelty solos, speeded the tape up, added echo and reverb, turned up Bernard Odum’s
ee undue great bass line, cut the seven-minute take down to two minutes of pure funk, and
: produced an instant classic that lived up to its boastful title.
wofings, “Papas Got a Brand New Bag” was Brown's first R&B Number One since 1958
az vere and his first single to make the pop Top Ten. It earned his first Grammy Award,
2 eels for “Best Rhythm & Blues Recording” of 1965.
ene After “Brand New Bag” returned Brown to the top of the R&B charts, he fol-
: lowed with a string of hits that changed the sound of popular music. The first
eden was “I Got You (I Feel Good),’ a revamping of “I Found You.” Brown felt that
2525 23 the earlier record had been “too sharp.’ As he explained to bandleader Nat Jones,
sae “This song is too hip. We're taking some of the funk out of it and making it too
eae jazz." With the funk restored, the record hit number one on the R&B chart and,
amazingly, number three on the pop singles chart.
p= aes) “It's a Man's Man's Mans World,’recorded in March 1966, was a dramatic change
wos agguling of pace. Lushly orchestrated, the record was a remake of a single Brown cut for
seamed. Smash, ‘The song was written by Betty Newsome, who said she “wrote the lyrics
eee from the Bible ... I don’t believe in equal rights for women. I believe a woman
S <a has a place, a man has a place. And IJ was saying that whatever happens, whether
eo he has the first word or the last word, he's nothing without a woman.”
oe ‘The record was pretty bizarre, even for 1966. Not only were the lyrics a bit
: strange, the feel of the song was more Las Vegas than Apollo Theatre. It sure
spel didn't come from papa’s brand new bag, but the single topped the R&B chart and
semis entered the pop Top Ten.
ne GS oes Brown's next R&B chart-topper was “Cold Sweat (Part 1),’ co-written with
geese, bandleader Pee Wee Ellis. Brown was angry when he wrote the song. He felt
od Fees that, with their current hit singles of “Funky Broadway,’ Wilson Pickett and the
group Dyke and the Blazers were trying “to get into my thing.” And that made
= Sree Soul Brother Number One break out in, well, a cold sweat.
sueeeele According to Ellis, “Cold Sweat” was born when “James called me into his
tau * pee, dressing room after a gig. He grunted the rhythm, the bass line, to me. I wrote
re the rhythm down on a piece of paper. There were no notes; I had to translate it.
ee I made some sort of graphic of where the notes should be’ Ellis worked up an
eles 2 arrangement from his notes and taught the new song to the band. “Cold Sweat”
was recorded in May 1967 in two takes at the King studio in Cincinnati.
oer Engineer Ron Lenhoff recalls the session as being quick, even by Brown's stan-
es 1 eae dards, “For ‘Cold Sweat;” says Lenhoff, “we made a record right then and there:

--- Page 10 ---
172 ® KING OF THE QUEEN CITY @ ©THE HARDEST-
set up, got it down, mixed it to mono, mastered it, got it ready for the street.” giving Clyde [Stubblefield] a s:
‘The seven-minute song, issued that summer on the album Cold Sweat, may be steady while Pee Wee humme-
Brown's most monumental creation, the purest dose of James Brown's new bag line had become cleat to Chz=::
ever recorded, It’s perfect, especially the screams. to Country [Kellum], the rh:
“Cold Sweat (Part 1),’a three-minute distillation of the seven-minute groove, would fit with the bass notes.
was a huge hit. As unusual as it was—where were the melody and the chord “A B-flat 9 was finally serz/z,
changes?—the record crossed over in a big way, peaking at number eight on the the bass line and the drumbezz.
pop chart. It was a major presence on the radio that summer. to fit the developing groove. ™:
“Cold Sweat’ deeply affected the musicians I knew,’ says Jerry Wexler, the leg- proceeded to hum out horr. zz
endary producer at Atlantic who worked with Aretha Franklin, Wilson Pickett, fully voiced chords and a me-=:
and Ray Charles. “It just freaked them out, For a time, no one could get a handle ... The music of James Browz
on what to do next.” the simple parts with enthus:::
It wasnt a matter of just copying. As drummer Jabo Starks says,“So many things in a groove for long periods =?
that were done weren't written, because you just couldn't. You couldn't write that If Brown's working meci:2 2:
feel. Many, many times wed just play off each other, until James would say,"That's cause he was working by 2 -2=
ert and melodies and lyrics were =;
The big hits continued for Brown in 1968 and 1969. “I Got the Feelin,” “Say groove, and only the groove. +>
It Loud—I'm Black and I’m Proud,” “Give It Up or Turnit a Loose,’ “Mother in Brown's head.
Popcorn,” and “Super Bad” all topped the R&B charts. As Brown said in God-z:*>
James Brown possessed a singular musical genius, but the realization of his vi- move in a whole other dirzz=-
sion required collaboration. Brown knew (more or less) what he wanted, but as he everything was starting co >= _
ventured farther away from conventional musical forms and structures, he lacked can hear my voice alternez: -—-~
the knowledge of music theory to articulate his complex ideas. As Fred Wesley, was trying to get every aszz= -
Brown's bandleader in the early 1970s, explains, “It would have been impossible patterns.”
for James Brown to put his show together without the assistance of someone like “Thad discovered thar —-- —=
Pee Wee [Ellis], who understood chord changes, time signatures, scales, notes, even the guitars, like thes =--:
and basic music theory. On playbacks [in the stuciz) +>
“The show depended on having someone with musical knowledge remember way, I knew that was ir: de> s—:
the show, the individual parts, and the individual song, then relay these verbally the rhythm was right.”*
or in print to the other musicians. Brown could not do it himself. He needed Guitarist Jimmy Nozex. =>:
musicians to translate [his ideas] into music and actual songs in order to create cabulary, is a relatively -:_-:.
an actual show.’* therefore the music of —2:- 3
Records were done the same way. Wesley would go to Brown's dressing room Nolen (1934-83) joined ==: <7
after a show and Brown “would hum stuff to me to put together for the next ses- mediately,
sion. He would hum, sing, or beat out bass lines or drum licks or horn parts, and Nolen joined the bani -_—- -
I would write this stuff down and translate it to the band the next day at rehearsal His guitar work subseczz-~- >
or on the bus as we traveled.’” as “I Got You (I Feel Geoi 7 1
Wesley described a typical session in Hit Me, Fred: “We set up and Pee Wee Black and I'm Proud,’ “F=-.- 7:
[Ellis] proceeded to put together a song—with no written music. He started by “Let a Man Come in ar 7:

--- Page 11 ---
® THE HARDEST-WORKING MAN IN SHOW BUSINESS @ 173
giving Clyde [Stubblefield] a simple drumbeat. Clyde started the bear and held it
: steady while Pee Wee hummed a bass line to Charles Sherrell ... When the bass
: line had become clear to Charles and locked with the drumbeat, Pee Wee moved

to Country [Kellum], the rhythm guitar player, and began to choose a chord that
3 would fit with the bass notes.
: “A B-flat 9 was finally settled on and a chunky rhythm was matched up with
: the bass line and the drumbeat. . . Jimmy Nolen was allowed to find his own thing
to fit the developing groove. With the rhythm section solidly in place, Pee Wee
. proceeded to hum out horn parts. We were given some strategic hits with care-
: fully voiced chords and a melodic line that happened whenever it was signaled*”
2 ... The music of James Brown is very simple, musically. The main thing is to play
the simple parts with enthusiasm and to have the endurance to hold those parts
i in a groove for long periods of time.”*!
: If Brown's working methods in the studio appeared strange, it was partly be-
: cause he was working by a new set of rules. He had a brand new bag, remember,
and melodies and lyrics were no longer the foundations of a song. It was now the
groove, and only the groove. And that started with the beat, and the beat started
= in Brown's head.
As Brown said in Godfather of Soul, “You can hear the band and me start to
. move in a whole other direction rhythmically. The horns, the guitar, the vocals,
: everything was starting to be used to establish all kinds of rhythm at once. You
S can hear my voice alternate with the horns to create various rhythmic accents. I
was trying to get every aspect of the production to contribute to the rhythmic
= patterns.”
2 “Thad discovered that my strength was in the rhythm. I was hearing everything,
5 even the guitars, like they were drums. I had found out how to make it happen.
On playbacks [in the studio], when I saw the speakers jumping, vibrating a certain
iS way, I knew that was it: deliverance. I could tell from looking at the speakers that
the rhythm was right.’**
zs Guitarist Jimmy Nolen, the man who introduced “chank” to the musical vo-
n cabulary, is a relatively unsung architect of James Browns musical sound—and
therefore the music of much of the modern world. A veteran blues guitarist,
= Nolen (1934~—83) joined the James Brown Show in 1965. His impact was felt im-
3 mediately.
- Nolen joined the band just in time to record “Papa's Got a Brand New Bag.”
z. His guitar work subsequently played a crucial role on such seminal funk records
as “I Got You (I Feel Good),’ “Cold Sweat,’“I Got The Feelin, “Say It Loud—I'm
= Black and I'm Proud,’ “Funky Drummer,’ “The Popcorn,’ “Mother Popcorn,’ and
= “Let a Man Come in and Do the Popcorn (Part One).”

--- Page 12 ---
174. @ KING OF THE QUEEN CITY @ @ THE HARCES~-
‘The English magazine Mojo, in its survey of “The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All singing his big pop single.” _~-=,
‘Time,’ ranks Jimmy Nolen number twelve. Among American guitarists, he trails the 1992 Grammy Awarés ==: >
only B.B. King, T-Bone Walker, Chuck Berry, Steve Cropper, and Jimi Hendrix. and induction as a charte- — =
In describing Nolen’s style, Alan Paul wrote that“Nolen practically invented funk The lows have been prear oa
guitar,’ Papa's Got a Brand New Bag, with its chinga-chinga-ching break, made the assault, and vehicular cherz:: 7
vamp a central part of Brown's music, a development as central to the definition states while high on the ==>: -7
of funk as the rhythmic first beat stress—'the one.”** Show Business was take == --s
Brown certainly appreciated Nolen’s playing.“ You can hear Jimmy Nolen [on in prison. He was paroles :- >=
“Papa's Got A Brand New Bag”],’ wrote Brown, “starting to play scratch guitar by problems but also had 2:2.
where you squeeze the strings tight and quick against the frets, so the sound is In August 2003, James 2-277
hard and fast without any sustain. He was what we called a chanker; instead of annual arts award presenz22 > -
playing the whole chord and using all the strings, he hit his chords on just three Washington, D.C., to ken:- = >
strings.” able contributions ... te 22: 2:
A native of Oklahoma, Nolen had recorded as a solo artist for King in the mid- honor.
19508. Between November 1955 and May 1956, Nolen cut twelve songs, all issued James Brown died on 2 ezz-2
on Federal singles. His version of “After Hours’ appeared on a King compilation of death was congestive 227 =.
album later in the decade. But it is Nolen’s work during sixteen years with James very public squabble ber z2- =—
Brown that earned him universal acclaim. Funk music wouldn't be funky without legally married) and the sinzz-. ;
Nolen. March 10, 2007, ina temzcr- =
For a rhythm guitarist who rarely played a solo, Nolen has been inordinately legal matters are resolved. 2. 2
influential upon other guitarists. The keys to Nolen’s widely imitated “chank’” are
fast sixteenth-note strumming on the guitar's treble strings and extensive use of 7th
and goth chords during extended vamps. Nolen began developing the style during
his days with Johnny Otis, primarily to cover for deficient drummers. Nolen told
writers Lee Hildebrand and Henry Kaiser that some of the drummers he worked
with “were just lazy. I used to try to play and keep my rhythm going as much like
a drum as I possibly could. So many times I had to just play guitar and drums all
at the same time.’”*
Jimmy Nolen died of a heart attack in 1983, before he really received the credit
due him. But his music lives on, and in some surprising places. It’s there in al-
bums by the Red Hot Chili Peppers, Talking Heads, U2, the Meters, Parliament/
Funkadelic, the Rolling Stones, Tower of Power, and Earth, Wind and Fire. Nolen’s
style permeates modern African music. His percussive approach touched such
guitar masters as Jimi Hendrix, Jeff Beck, and Roy Buchanan, as well as every
funk guitarist who ever lived.
James Brown's post-King career had its ups and downs. The triumphs include a
1974 appearance at a massive music festival in Zaire; a movie-stealing appearance
as a preacher in The Blues Brothers in 1980; an appearance in Rocky IV in 1986
eo a i

--- Page 13 ---
©@ THE HARDEST-WORKING MAN IN SHOW BUSINESS e 175
singing his big pop single, “Living in America”; Lifetime Achievement Awards at
the 1992 Grammy Awards and from the Rhythm and Blues Foundation in 1993;
and induction as a charter member into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame in 1986,

‘The lows have been pretty low. The worst was Brown's 1988 arrest for drug,
assault, and vehicular charges after leading police on a wild car chase through two
states while high on the mind-bending drug PCP. The Hardest-Working Man in
Show Business was taken of the road in December 1988, sentenced to six years
in prison. He was paroled in February 1991. Brown's post-prison life was dogged
by problems but also had occasional bright spots.

In August 2003, James Brown received one of five Kennedy Center Honors, an
annual arts award presented by the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in
Washington, D.C., to honor those who have made “unique and extremely valu-
able contributions ... to the cultural life of our nation.” He richly deserved the
honor.

James Brown died on December 25, 2006, in Atlanta at the age of 73. The cause
of death was congestive heart failure. Brown's burial was delayed by an ugly and
very public squabble between Brown's domestic partner (she and Brown were not
legally married) and the singer's grown children. Brown's body was finally buried
March 10, 2007, in a temporary tomb at che home of one of his children until the
legal matters are resolved. May he eventually rest in peace.
