--- Page 1 ---
“BROWN-EYED =2
=
i AN Ww
Rock’n’ Roll and Race
T emergence of rock ’n’ roll as a cultural phenomenon coincided
with great ferment in the movement to grant civil rights to African
Americans. Enmeshed in the racial politics of the 1950s, rock ’n’ roll
was credited with and criticized for promoting integration and eco-
nomic opportunity for blacks while bringing to “mainstream” culture
black styles and values. In the South, rock ’n’ roll became a lightning
rod for die-hard segregationists who associated the music—and
African Americans—with depraved beliefs and behavior. Rock ’n’ roll
8 was also big business, and therefore subject to the dictates of the white
3 mass market, as interpreted by recording and broadcasting profes-
5 sionals. In pursuit of profit they shunned controversy, exploited black
4 performers, bleached the music, and promoted white rock ’n’ rollers.
g Subject to these pressures and counterpressures, rock ’n’ roll remained
3 a highly visible and contested arena for struggles over racial identity
4 and cultural and economic empowerment in the United States.
e The seminal event for proponents of black rights in the 1950s was
3 the decision by the U.S. Supreme Court in five cases (from Kansas,
2 Delaware, South Carolina, Virginia, and the District of Columbia)
6 challenging segregation in public schools—usually cited by reference
8 to the first, Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas. The
z cases, which capped decades of work by the NAACP and other orga-
° 35
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 2 ---
36 ALL SHOOK UP
nizations, tested the doctrine, enunciated in 1896 in Plessy v. Fergu-
son, that public facilities for blacks and whites were constitutional if
they were “separate but equal.” The plaintiffs in Brown demonstrated
that separate but equal in the South was a sham: southerners spent
twice as much to educate white children as they did for blacks, four
times as much for white school facilities, and more than ten times as
much for white colleges. In its brief to the Court, the NAACP also
introduced psychological findings (based on Kenneth Clark’s experi-
ments with the responses of children to black and white dolls) that
separating people by race engendered feelings of inferiority. On May
17, 1954, Chief Justice Earl Warren read the opinion for a unanimous
Court: “We conclude that in the field of public opinion the doctrine of
‘separate but equal’ has no place. Separate educational facilities are
inherently unequal.” A year later, the Court mandated that compliance
with the ruling in Brown should proceed “with all deliberate speed.”
The decision emboldened African Americans to take to the streets
in search of racial equality. On December 1, 1955, in Montgomery,
Alabama, a black seamstress, Rosa Parks, was arrested for refusing to
comply with a municipal ordinance requiring her to yield her seat on
a bus to a white passenger. The next night community leaders met and
organized the Montgomery Improvement Association, with Martin
Luther King Jr., the twenty-six-year-old minister of the Dexter Avenue
Baptist Church, as its president. The association launched a boycott
3 of the city buses. Smart, courageous, and eloquent, King brought to
: the civil rights movement a philosophy (and strategy) of nonviolent,
2 passive resistance. He hoped to attract the attention of the media, win
z adherents, and wear down antagonists by appeals to the heart, the
2 conscience, and “our capacity to suffer.” Blacks in Montgomery, who
eB constituted three-quarters of the passengers on city buses, King
4 pledged, were determined to “work and fight until justice runs down
c like water and righteousness like a mighty stream.” Withstanding
5 threats, arrests, and bombings, they did just that, forming car pools,
Z hitchhiking, or walking to work and school for several months, On
x December 20, 1956, the Supreme Court gave the civil rights movement
3 another victory, striking down segregation in public transportation.
2 The following September, Orval] Faubus, governor of Arkansas,
. called out the National Guard to thwart a court order mandating that
° Little Rock Central High School admit nine black students. With John
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 3 ---
Rock *n’ Roll and Race a7
Chancellor, a junior reporter for NBC, on the scene, millions of Amer-
icans saw bayonets raised to keep the students from entering the
school. They heard Chancellor’s account, with the expletives deleted,
of a mob shouting at fifteen-year-old Elizabeth Eckford, “Go home,
you bastard of a black bitch.” The coverage forced President Dwight
Eisenhower, who did not believe “you can change the hearts of men
with laws or decisions,” to act. Although two months earlier he could
not “imagine any set of circumstances that would ever induce me to
send federal troops,’ Eisenhower federalized the Arkansas National
Guard and sent a thousand paratroopers from the 1o1st Airborne to
escort the students to school and protect them. Soldiers stayed in Little
Rock for the entire school year. The students faced constant harass-
ment; they were kicked, tripped, their lockers broken into, their books
stolen. But Central High School had been integrated.

By 1956, then, white southerners understood that the entire edifice
of Jim Crow segregation was under assault. Senator James Eastland of
Mississippi promised that the region would neither “abide by nor
obey” the decisions of “a political court.”2 Legislators in several states
introduced “freedom of choice” school bills designed to avoid com-
pliance with the Supreme Court by providing public funding for
“private” schools. Even more ominously, the Ku Klux Klan reemerged.
The Klan was responsible for at least 530 incidents of racial violence
across the South between 1955 and 1959. White Citizens Councils were

3 formed as well, dedicated to take any measure necessary to oppose
: integration. Virginia Senator Harry F. Byrd supplied a rallying cry for
2 militant segregationists: “Massive Resistance.” In 1956, 101 members
z of Congress signed a “Southern Manifesto.” Branding the Supreme
2 Court’s Brown decision a “clear abuse of judicial power,’ they pledged
eB not to obey it. At the end of the year six southern states had not yet
é allowed a single black child into a school attended by whites.
a Rock ’n’ roll became a target of southern segregationists, who
5 believed that race mixing led, inevitably, to miscegenation and that
Z exposure to black culture promoted juvenile delinquency and sexual
x immorality. Asa Carter, former radio commentator, soft-drink sales-
3 man, and member of Ku Klux Klan Klavern No. 31, used the threat of
2 rock ’n’ roll to enhance his status as a leader of the White Councils in
. Alabama. Lumping together rock ’n’ roll, bebop, blues, “congo
° rhythms,” and “jungle music,” Carter got the attention of Newsweek
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 4 ---
~— ee te ‘ee oe
e Anes a
ay ar 5 “Share
. oR
ae | ne i
“2 ‘a
i as “ee
SR AAA
SSS A AY
A SN i i Wh
Se SWS MAS r '
SS WY AN P 2 La
SS iff! .
aa aN nt gl &
SS gt y
bo
Rees oY | 3
ff at a
eee oe a
a 4
2 pct Pc
y ea Sed 3
— ed 7 an at é 2)
fi - Na ae Peres, Sere tele. ~
5 oo pee A
: ba ea
& . . . bs Ee
= ’ :
< pee c, co
8 it $# by SS Vee : =
gs
8 Though he was not a rock ’n’ roll performer, Nat King Cole was assaulted
2 in Birmingham, Alabama, by racist thugs who feared “the savagery” of black
g music. (Frank Driggs Collection)
>
5 and the New York Times with an assault on the “basic, heavy-beat
5 music of the Negroes. It appeals to the base in man; brings out ani-
x malism and vulgarity.” The roots of rock ’n’ roll, according to Carter,
2 were in “the heart of Africa, where it was used to incite warriors to
2 such frenzy that by nightfall neighbors were cooked in carnage pots!
a . . . .
2 The music is a designed reversion to savagery!” Part of an NAACP
° plot “to mongrelize America.” rock ’n’ roll music should be purged
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 5 ---
Rock *n’ Roll and Race a9
from jukeboxes and record shops throughout the South. Action com-
mittees of White Citizens Councils, Carter announced, had been
formed “to see the people who sponsor the music, and the people who
promote Negro bands to play for teenagers.”3

This rhetoric helps explain the assault on Nat King Cole, hardly a
rock ’n’ roll performer, at a whites-only concert in Birmingham on
April 10, 1956. As Cole sang the Tin Pan Alley standard “Little Girl?
someone shouted, “Let’s go get that coon,’ and several whites jumped
onto the stage to wrestle the singer to the floor. A stunned Ted Heath
Orchestra switched, incongruously, to “God Save the Queen” until the
police rescued Cole. The plot, it turned out, had been conceived four
days earlier at a gas station by members of the Alabama Citizens
Council, one of whom was an editor of Carter’s newspaper, The South-
erner. In their cars, the assailants had brass knuckles, blackjacks, and
.22-caliber rifles. They had hoped that the white men in the audience
would join them when they stormed the stage.*
Asa Carter, who attended the concert, denied that he had any role
in the assault. At the same time, he insisted it was only “a short step
... from the sly, nightclub technique vulgarity of Cole, to the openly
animalistic obscenity of the horde of Negro rock ’n’ rollers.” In the
pages of The Southerner, the motive for the attack emerged. The paper
printed pictures of Cole and white fans, with captions such as “Cole
and His White Women” and “Cole and Your Daughter.” In an article
3 accompanying a photograph of Cole at the piano with white singer
: June Christy behind him, her hands touching his shoulders, Carter
2 asked, “How many negroes have been encouraged to make advances
z to white girls and women, by the constant strumming of such propa-
2 ganda in their minds? ... You have seen it, the fleeting leer, the look
eB that stays an instant longer, ... the savagery, now, almost to the
4 surface.”5
c Carter then put the pressure on rock ’n’ roll. His North Alabama
5 Citizens Council picketed a concert featuring the Platters, LaVern
Z Baker, Bo Diddley, Clyde McPhatter, and white performer Bill Haley,
x with placards proclaiming, “NAACP says integration, rock & roll, rock
3 & roll.” The city commissioners of Birmingham responded quickly,
2 instructing the manager of the Municipal Auditorium “not to book any
. shows, basketball games, or any other type of event that had mixed
° races in the personnel.” Other southern states acted as well. In the
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 6 ---
40 ALL SHOOK UP
summer of 1956 the legislature of Louisiana banned interracial danc-
ing. A few months later, the school board of Little Rock, Arkansas,
declared that “social functions which involve racial mixing will not be
held.” In Norfolk, Virginia, singer Larry Williams, who had recorded
the hits “Bony Maronie” and “Dizzy Miss Lizzy,’ was arrested after
he took off his shirt and leaped off the stage—and across the color
line—to dance with his white fans. Elvis had reportedly “cracked”
Memphis segregation laws in June 1956 by attending an amusement
park during what was designated as “colored night”; he found a judge
in Jacksonville, Florida, in August, waiting in the wings to arrest him
if there was a “vulgar performance.”6
Outside the South as well, a racialized discourse accompanied
denunciations of rock ’n’ roll. White supremacists in Inglewood, Cal-
ifornia, showed pictures of black men and women dancing, with the
captions “Boy meets girl .. . be-bop style” and “Total mongrelization.”
“Rock and roll enflames and excites youth like jungle tom-toms,’ the
Reverend John Carroll told the Teachers Institute of the Archdiocese
of Boston. Worried about alienating listeners and advertisers, owners
of radio stations hesitated before “contaminating” previously lily-white
stations. Television was even more skittish: rock ’n’ roll was rarely per-
formed on variety shows until late in the decade, except on Dick
Clark’s American Bandstand. Officially integrated in 1957, Bandstand,
Julian Bond remembered, “always had a black couple. Usually a black
8 couple, never more than one. A couple because they always had to
8 have someone to dance with. Each other.”’
5 Attacks on Negro performers and rock ’n’ roll tended to polarize;
4 in many quarters they evoked more vocal support for the civil rights
8 movement. When NAACP official Walter White asked the rhythm and
8 blues group the Dominoes to perform at a fund-raiser, Billy Ward
4 lauded “the great work the organization is doing for mankind,’ declar-
5 ing it an “honor and a privilege to place my group at your disposal.”8
3 Even more instructive was the response in African-American com-
2 munities to Nat King Cole’s self-professed political indifference in the
é aftermath of the attack on him in Birmingham. “I can’t understand it,”
g Cole told reporters. “I have not taken part in any protests. Nor have I
z joined an organization fighting segregation. Why should they attack
é me?” A native of Alabama, Cole seemed eager to assure southern
whites that he would not challenge the customs and traditions of the
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 7 ---
Rack *n’ Roll and Race Al
region. A few would keep the protests going for a while, he claimed,
but “I’d just like to forget about the whole thing.” Cole had no inten-
tion of altering his practice of playing to segregated audiences in the
South. He did not condone the practice but was not a politician and
believed “I can’t change the situation in a day.”

Denunciations of the singer by African Americans were immediate,
harsh, and virtually unanimous, unaffected by Cole’s revelations that
he had contributed money to the Montgomery Bus Boycott and had
sued several northern hotels that had hired but refused to serve him.
Thurgood Marshall, chief legal counsel of the NAACP, reportedly sug-
gested that since he was an Uncle Tom, Cole ought to perform with a
banjo. Roy Wilkins, the executive secretary of the organization, chal-
lenged Cole in a telegram: “You have not been a crusader or engaged
in an effort to change the customs or laws of the South. That respon-
sibility, newspapers quote you as saying, you ‘leave to the other guys’
That attack upon you clearly indicates that organized bigotry makes
no distinction between those who do not actively challenge racial dis-
crimination and those who do. This is a fight which none of us can
escape. We invite you to join us in a crusade against racism. . . .”

Cole’s appearances before all-white audiences, the Chicago
Defender charged, were “an insult to his race.” As boycotts of his
records and shows were organized, the Amsterdam News claimed that
“thousands of Harlem blacks who have worshiped at the shrine of

3 singer Nat King Cole turned their backs on him this week as the noted
: crooner turned his back on the NAACP and said that he will continue
2 to play to Jim Crow audiences.” To play “Uncle Nat’s” discs, wrote a
z commentator in The American Negro, “would be supporting his ‘trai-
2 tor’ ideas and narrow way of thinking.”
eB Deeply hurt by the criticism of the black press, Cole was also suit-
4 ably chastened. Emphasizing his opposition to racial segregation “in
e any form,” he agreed to join other entertainers in boycotting segregated
8 venues. He quickly and conspicuously paid $500 to become a life
Z member of the Detroit branch of the NAACP. Until his death in 1965
x Cole was an active and visible participant in the civil rights movement,
3 playing an important role in planning the March on Washington
2 in 1963.9
. The criticism of Cole reflected African Americans’ enthusiasm for
° and rising expectations about integration and racial justice in the
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 8 ---
42 ALL SHOOK UP
1950s. “Negroes don’t want to be Negroes anymore,” a reader wrote
to Ebony. “We want to be Americans whose skins are incidentally
dark.” The editors of the magazine agreed: “The faulty walls of preju-
dice are crumbling. ... The Negro is at last being assimilated into the
great melting pot that is America ... as his acceptance as an Ameri-
can becomes a reality, his role as a full-time Negro should diminish.”
In a poll conducted by Ebony, a majority of teenagers indicated that
current discrimination in employment would not dissuade them from
preparing for careers of their choice. “By the time we are ready for
the jobs,” said Alfred Arnold, an honor student at Lincoln High
School in Kansas City, Missouri, “the doors will be open.” Along
with white supporters of civil rights, blacks looked to entertainment,
especially rock ’n’ roll, as a weapon in the struggle against Jim Crow.
The “campaign against ‘crazy music;” the Pittsburgh Courier recog-
nized, “is an indirect attack against Negroes, of course, because they
invented rock ’n’ roll (as they did all other distinctive U.S. music)
and because it has so captivated the younger generation of whites
that they are breaking down dance floors and gutting night clubs
here and abroad. As between rock ’n’ roll ... and the chill austerities
of white supremacy, we think the young white Americans will choose
the former with all of its implications.” Herbert Reed of the Platters
put a more positive spin on the same point. “Wherever we go,” he
claimed, “white kids beg us for autographs.” In Austin, Texas, “a rope
3 was put up to separate Negroes and whites in the audience. When
5 we started singing, the kids broke the rope and started dancing
2 together. That rock ’n’ roll beat gets them all.”!°
= Convinced that the music promoted racial harmony, African
8 Americans also embraced rock ’n’ roll as a vehicle for social mobility
8 for talented blacks. Reaching out to readers interested in joining the
= mainstream material-and-money-accumulating middle class in the
é United States, black newspapers and magazines zeroed in on rock ’n’
8 rollers’ income. “Never before in show business,’ Ebony crowed, “has
5 Negro youth asserted itself so profitably and in such numbers.” They
8 made up 80 percent of the teenage-age “doo-wop” groups “riding the
s Cadillac path of the multi-million dollar rock ’n’ roll business.”
8 Twenty-seven-year-old LaVern Baker also rode rock ’n’ roll from
= rags to riches. Before she recorded “Tweedle Dee,’ Baker was a little-
5 known blues singer earning $125 a week——when she worked. Now,
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 9 ---
Rock *n’ Roll and Race 43
the “chunky bundle of musical fire” with the husky voice, “sexy ges-
tures and daring body movements” was “the high priestess of rock ’n’
roll, taking home more than $75,000 a year.”!!

In Antoine “Fats” Domino, Ebony found an ideal role model for its
readers. Born in 1928 in New Orleans, Domino (his real name) learned
to play the piano as a youngster. He expanded into his nickname
(bestowed in homage to his idol, jazz pianist Fats Waller), growing out
more than up, to five-foot-two and 224 pounds. Good humored, with
a Creole patois and a style reminiscent of the R&B showman Louis
Jordan, Fats closed his shows by shoving the piano across the stage as
the band played “When the Saints Go Marching In.” By the early ’50s,
he had three million-selling records to his credit: “The Fat Man,”
“Goin’ Home,’ and “Goin’ to the River.” In 1955, he became a rock
’n’ roll star, with “Ain’t That a Shame,” which he cowrote with his
arranger and producer, Dave Bartholomew.

Released three months after Domino had performed at Alan Freed’s
first “Rock ’n’ Roll Ball” in New York City—and while Blackboard
Jungle and “Rock Around the Clock” were sweeping the nation—
“Ain’t That a Shame” shot to the top of the R&B charts and reached
number 10 on Billboard’s pop best-sellers. For the remainder of the
decade, Domino was one of the most popular recording stars in the
United States, striking gold with one genial good-time hit after another,
including “Blueberry Hill?” “Whole Lotta Loving,” and “I’m Walkin’.”!2

3 Ebony hailed Domino as the “King of Rock ’n’ Roll.” When Elvis per-
5 formed, according to the magazine, teenagers swooned. Pat Boone
g made them “flop around like headless chickens.” But when Fats
z Domino “builds to a climax, riding along on the locomotive-like beat of
2 his seven-man combo, pandemonium erupts. Teen-agers shriek and
eB contort their bodies; their limbs jerk in spastic rhythms; their eyes roll”
4 and they shake “like leaves.” On at least three occasions in 1956, the
e mass hysteria at his concerts required riot police to restore order. The
8 singer neither caused nor condoned the violence, Ebony hastened to
Z add, attributing the disturbances in Newport, Rhode Island, and Fayette-
x ville, North Carolina, to an inadvertent “dousing of lights” during the
3 performances. “I don’t know why music should make anybody fight,”
2 Fats agreed. “It makes me happy even when I’m feeling bad.”
. Photo captions underscored Domino’s appeal to a broad cross-
° section of Americans. One showed him at a gallery, where “teen-agers
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 10 ---
BL - a oe Rivw wa
: \—— 1 J /
' 2 , BT 4 } - iA (/
| EN sé ry |
. ~~) 4 : es ;
: *. = . ; |
~ S
s L_.
——a
¥ ll a - |
_—aneemmaste 4
e ~~ eo
oe ¢ # —
' rE 5 ‘
. ”
a
—-
= re 4 g E “
aoe | ee Pp
3 ee a y
@ ike Fa 7 me I a Pea)
5 3 - “ sah is rs AB 7
> | hae i“ Z : Pa 7s r o é
z on ad —_— , »
3 a | =.
a & 5 Ls it
g z a ‘ Pe uj . adhe
2
a 2 . * . a
= With “Ain’t That a Shame.” Antoine “Fats” Domino became the first black
3 rock ’n’ roll millionaire. (Frank Driggs Collection)
z
Zz
2
x
°
3
a
©
=
>
S
&
3
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 11 ---
Rock *n’ Roll and Race 4p
rub shoulders with older fans.” Another affirmed that he cut “through
age and race barriers,’ providing pictures of conversations with
“screaming teen-agers, an elderly woman in Massachusetts and a
matronly fan in California.”

According to Ebony, Domino was likely to become the first black
rock ’n’ roll millionaire. Already making as much as $2,500 a night, he
had been paid $7,500 for an hour’s work in the movie The Girl Can’t
Help It. But success had not gone to his head. On the road some 340
days a year, Domino called his wife, Rosemary, every day, running up
a telephone bill of $200 each month. A devoted mate and mother,
Rosemary enjoyed her husband’s music and watched him on TV but
never attended any of his concerts. “I don’t like clubs and parties and
all those people,’ she confessed. Rosemary had gotten used to her hus-
band’s absences, though she often wished he had “a plain job.” Like
him, she had not succumbed to conspicuous consumption. “I don’t
own a fur coat,” she told Ebony, because the weather in New Orleans
“did not get cold enough” for her to wear one very often.13

In this portrait, pride alternates with defensiveness. Many blacks
were delighted that rhythm and blues was having a tremendous influ-
ence on the popular music of the nation and that African-American
artists like Fats Domino, as Cash Box put it, were “accepted for them-
selves alone.” They relished the rush by white pop singers to record
rhythm and blues songs. Most of all, they were pleased that as they

3 danced, in pink and black peg pants, toreadors and pin curls, those
incorrigible rock ’n’ roll fans were, at least for a few moments, inte-
e grated Americans. Nonetheless, as products of an unsettled 1950s, they
z worried as much as white adults about rock ’n’ roll’s tendency to
2 release economic and emotional inhibitions and undermine the
eB authority of the family, the church, and the state. For blacks in (or
é poised to enter) the middle class there was an added concern: the pos-
e sibility that, thanks to rock ’n’ roll, Negro culture would be defined
8 and disdained as vulgar and licentious, the contributions of its intel-
Z lectuals, politicians, and professionals ignored. With its animal
5 gyrations, said Congressman Emmanuel Cellar, rock ’n’ roll violated
3 good taste, but it had its place, at least “among the colored people.”
= African Americans did not have to read Norman Mailer’s essay “The
a White Negro” (1957) to know that for some whites Negroes repre-
© sented an ethic of “immoderation, childlike in its adoration of the
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 12 ---
46 ALL SHOOK UP
present,’ and of Saturday night kicks where the pleasures of the mind
were surrendered “for the more obligatory pleasures of the body.”
Even when delivered in a “laundered popular way,” the music gave
voice to the rage of the white male “and the infinite variations of joy,
lust, languor, growl, cramp, pinch, and despair of his orgasm.”!4
These concerns reached into—and divided—many churchgoing
African-American families, who were otherwise attracted by the
prospect of lives of materia] comfort that seemed, finally, to be within
their grasp. In 1958, fourteen-year-old Alleasie Titus confessed in a
letter to Martin Luther King Jr. that she enjoyed rock ’n’ roll but
assured him she did not dance. “Can a person be a Christian and inter-
ested in those things?” she asked. “I know I can’t combine the work
of the Devil and the Lord. Should I quit listening to them?” King had
answered this question earlier in the year, in an “Advice for Living”
column in Ebony. Gospel music and rock ’n’ roll, he asserted, were
“totally incompatible” because the latter “often plunges men’s minds
into degrading and immoral depths.”!5
Swimming in the mainstream might also weaken the attachment of
African Americans to their own cultural—and musical—heritage.
Langston Hughes, the eminent black poet, thought rock ’n’ roll an
unsophisticated musical genre, less satisfactory, in theme and form,
than jazz, blues, and gospel. Rock ’n’ roll, he recognized, borrowed
the “gut-bucket heartache” of the blues, the “I’m gonna be happy
3 anyhow in spite of the world kind of hope” of the spirituals, and the
5 “steady beat of Congo square—that going on beat—and the March-
g ing Bands’ loud and blatant yes!” But it combined them in a “teenage
z ‘Heartbreak Hotel;” appealing to juveniles because “you are never too
3 young to know how bad it is to love and not have love come back to
eB you.” Rock ’n’ roll, Hughes concluded, with less than fulsome praise,
4 “makes a music so basic it’s like the meat cleaver the butcher uses—
c before the cook uses the knife—before you use the sterling silver at
8 the table on the meat that by then has been rolled up into a commer-
5 cial fillet mignon.” 16
8 Most blacks were eager to end the oppressive conditions in the
3 United States that caused this “gut-bucket heartache,” even if it meant
e they would be less motivated to sing the blues. A few intellectuals in
. the ’50s, however, worried that Negroes were getting “too close to
° white ways.” “Embarrassed about, angry at, or ashamed of” the blues
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 13 ---
Rock ’n’ Roll and Race 4]
and jazz, charged white music critic Berta Wood, black youngsters lis-
tened to Liberace, Jo Stafford, Joni James, and rock ’n’ rollers “in a
careless, popular way,” indistinguishable from whites. Even worse, they
were “eaten up” by the “diseases that spring from psychological inhi-
bitions” that once were “exclusive to white civilization.” If they tried
to think and act like white people, Wood concluded, Negroes would
lose their creativity, their physical grace, and their “soft, flowing
voices.”!7
The concerns raised by Wood would resurface, with greater inten-
sity, in the 1960s. In the ’50s, an awareness that integration might make
African-American culture less distinctive and reduce the special affin-
ity of blacks for music tended to be subordinated to an endorsement
of its social, political, and economic impact. That some ambivalence
remained is apparent in the assessment of rock ’n’ roll by black jazz
pianist Billy Taylor. “It’s musically trite” Taylor told Down Beat mag-
azine. “The kind of beat it brought back would have been better
discarded.” Taylor attributed the popularity of rock ’n’ roll to the
tenacity of its promoters: “They'll tie the disc jockey’s shoelaces, shave
him, baby sit for him.” But when asked whether rock ’n’ roll promoted
integration or produced riots, the normally articulate musician grew
tongue-tied, his answer the non sequitur of a man reluctant to give
rock ’n’ roll credit for anything but unwilling to criticize any phe-
nomenon that might be good for African Americans: “The social
3 aspects of rhythm and blues [as he insisted on calling it] have nothing
: whatsoever to do with the quality or lack of it in the music. I would say
2 that teenagers obviously are neither children nor are they grown. They
z have to have something completely their own—a manner of dress,
2 favorite movie stars, and now, rhythm and blues. Bop doesn’t make it
eB with them because it was useless for their social purposes—they
4 couldn’t sing or dance to it.”18
e Whether Billy Taylor, Berta Wood, and Langston Hughes liked it
8 or not, rock ’n’ roll was here to stay—and pay. Echoing Ebony, white
Z liberals viewed it as a barometer of, and to some extent a vehicle for,
5 progress in race relations in the United States. Rock ’n’ roll, Cash Box
3 exulted, was “Breaking Down the Barriers.” Noting that R&B hits
2 were routinely appearing at the top of the pop charts, the editors pub-
. lished article after article applauding the industry for opening doors
° for African-American artists and promoting understanding between
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 14 ---
48 ALL SHOOK UP
blacks and whites. With white acceptance of Fats Domino, Little
Richard, and Clyde McPhatter, the “buying of records according to the
color of the artist was shattered beyond recognition.” Cash Box
revealed that every song Bob Lloyd of WAVZ in New Haven, Con-
necticut, played on his morning program on the first day of
Brotherhood Week was performed by a black artist. Not one person
called the station to take note of or complain about the disc jockey’s
choices. Lloyd was ready to draw a moral to his story: “Let’s, therefore,
all judge people as fairly as we do the records on a radio show—indi-
vidually and on the merits of each.”!9
Rock ’n’ roll was also breaking down parochial tastes and promot-
ing a national culture, a phenomenon that seemed entirely salutary to
most Americans in the 1950s, because they linked an embrace of uni-
versal values to racial tolerance and integration. The music opened
minds and helped people appreciate “qualities which they never could
see before,” Cash Box claimed, a change “which in the ordinary course
of events might have taken untold amounts of time” to accomplish.
“How better to understand what is known to you than by apprecia-
tion of the emotional experience of other people. And how better are
the emotions portrayed than by music?”2¢
Anecdotal evidence supported the view that rock ’n’ roll challenged
racial stereotypes as it brought white and black youth together. Indus-
try publications noted, at almost every concert, a “mixed audience,”
3 conversing with one another as they waited on line to get in, then
5 “cheering themselves hoarse.” Harry Weinger, bass singer of the Plat-
g ters, saw white kids venture into African-American neighborhoods, in
z search of rock ’n’ roll. The experience gave them “a sense of fair play,”
3 he thought, that made them receptive to the civil rights movement.
eB These kids invited the Platters into their homes, even though their
4 “fathers looked at us like we were going to steal the goddammed
c refrigerator.” Chairman Johnson of the group Chairmen of the Board
3 observed the same phenomenon in South Carolina: “It was at the
5 beach that racial segregation began to break down, white kids could
x listen to R&B behind their folks’ backs.”2!
3 Many whites in the music industry recognized that rock ’n’ roll was
e a metaphor for integration. In Buffalo, New York, white disc jockey
. George “Hound Dog” Lorenz played rhythm and blues on WKBW,
° used slang adapted from black language patterns, and sponsored con-
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 15 ---
Rock *n’ Roll and Race 49
certs where black and white kids sat side by side watching black and
white performers. Radio, records, and television, to be sure, permitted
rock ’n’ roll fans to listen to the music without venturing into black
neighborhoods or rubbing shoulders with African Americans. Rock ’n’
roll surely did not do more for integration than Brown v. Board of Edu-
cation, as Herbie Cox of the Cleftones claimed, but it may have created
a climate that supported desegregation and voting rights for blacks.22

White teenagers occasionally courted physical danger to confront
racists. Shortly before he began his record hop for an all-white audi-
ence at Don’s Teen Town, in Bessemer, Alabama, in 1960, disc jockey
Shelley Stewart learned that eighty Ku Klux Klansman intended to
assault him. When the club manager announced that he was cancel-
ing the show because the Klan did not think that that “nigger, Shelley
the Playboy,’ should spin platters or dance with white girls, the audi-
ence erupted and set upon the Klansmen, permitting Stewart and three
black colleagues to sneak out and escape in his 1959 Impala. Pursued
by a white trooper, who evidently was more worried about a black
man exceeding the speed limit than a white mob bent on violence,
Stewart got away. He was convinced that the white teenagers had
saved his life.25

Although such incidents transformed those who experienced them,
they were rare. Rock ’n’ roll did not always raise the racial or politi-
cal consciousness of fans. Some listeners remained blissfully ignorant

3 of the racial connotations of rock ’n’ roll. Nineteen-year-old Virginia
Lemon of Little Rock, Arkansas, idolized Elvis Presley and James
e Dean but chose to be photographed in Look magazine wearing a Con-
z federate cap and waving a Confederate flag. In the North, many high
8 school and college students saw no conflict between listening to rock
eB ’n’ roll, disapproving of segregation in the South, and joining frater-
4 nities and sororities that were segregated by race and religion.24
e Did rock ’n’ roll provide unprecedented opportunities for African-
8 American performers, as the black media suggested? Before 1954, as
Z Arnold Shaw has pointed out, the walls of musical segregation were
5 high enough to keep most black performers out of the mass market
3 controlled by the major record companies but low enough to allow
2 white artists access to black audiences. Until then, as one observer put
. it, “you couldn’t make it unless you were white, sleek, nicely spoken,
° and phoney to your toenails.” Thus, the hits of Howlin’ Wolf and of
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 16 ---
50 ALL SHOOK UP
Ivory Joe Hunter and Ruth Brown’s “Teardrops from My Eyes,’ and
“Mama, He Treats Your Daughter Mean” reached the R&B charts but
were nowhere on the pop radar screen. By contrast, Johnnie Ray, a
white man who fashioned his style of singing by listening to Joe
Williams, Bessie Smith, and Billy Daniels, rocketed to the top of both
charts in 1951 with “Cry.”25
Among the black artists ignored by the majors and most radio sta-
tions was Arthur Crudup, a big man with a high-pitched voice, who
sang the blues like a shouter in a plantation field. Having achieved a
minor reputation with the songs “Mean Old Frisco Blues” and “That’s
All Right,’ Crudup jumped from label to label while working day jobs
in Indianapolis, in Chicago, and on the Mississippi River to support a
family of four children and nine stepchildren. In 1952, billed as Elmer
James, he left Bluebird for Trumpet Records. He then signed with
another “indie,” Checker, as Perry Lee Crudup, before joining Ace
Records as Big Boy Crudup. Although he did record again in the mid-
60s, Crudup’s heyday ended in 1954. When Elvis was recording
“That’s All Right,” Crudup was a migrant laborer en route to Florida.?6
As R&B performers “crossed over” to the pop charts with rock ’n’
roll hits, and pop singers scrambled to “cover rhythm and blues songs
as soon as they showed any sign at all of making noise,” blacks hoped
music would become color-blind. Billboard announced in February
1957 that it was ending its “Rhythm and Blues Notes” column and
8 inaugurating “On the Beat—Rhythm and Blues—Rock and Roll.” The
8 new format covered the “musical areas that have developed in the past
5 few years under the inspiration of the unusually wide acceptance of
4 the R&B idiom,” including rock ’n’ roll and rockabilly. “No abstract
g categories prevent the teenagers of today from buying records of Fats
3 Domino, Elvis Presley, Bill Haley, Carl Perkins, or Little Richard at
g one and the same time. The trade, therefore, must revise and perhaps
> abandon some of its old boundary lines.” R&B artists, columnist Gary
8 Kramer observed in “On the Beat,” now regularly reached white and
2 black audiences, “an interesting case of the integration of the tastes of
é the majority into the tastes of the minority.”27
g Rock ’n’ roll did open doors for African Americans. Of the 730 Top
©
z Ten hits on the Billboard charts between 1957 and 1964, black artists
é recorded 204, the largest percentage they ever registered. But the
record of the music industry was mixed. In the phenomenon of
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 17 ---
Rack ’a’ Roll and Race 5
“cover” versions of hit songs, one can see both racial progress and the
pervasiveness and tenacity of racism.?8
Assessing the impact of the cover phenomenon on African Ameri-
cans is more difficult than many music critics and historians have
acknowledged. Although covers “whitened” rhythm and blues, and
many black singers were exploited by record producers, covers also
helped develop a mass market for R&B and provided opportunities
for black writers and musicians. Many rhythm and blues performers,
no doubt, were as eager to “cross over” to that mass market as Ray
Charles: “My people made me what I am, because you have to become
big in your own community first, but as far as leaving that black audi-
ence exclusively, I never even thought twice about it.”29
Moreover, learning from, borrowing, and copying came with the
territory in music. Black as well as white musicians covered one
another all the time. “Musically, at least” wrote Ralph Ellison, the
great novelist and aficionado of jazz and blues, “each child in our town
was an heir of all the ages.” Ellison did not doubt that the blues, spir-
ituals, and jazz were influenced by classical music: “This is a pluralistic
society and culturally the melting pot really melts.” Ray Charles, too,
was untroubled that Carl Perkins, Pat Boone, and Elvis recorded
rhythm and blues songs. “It was just one of those American things,”
he concluded. “I believe in mixed musical marriages, and there’s no
way to copyright a feeling or a rhythm or a style of singing. Besides, it
3 meant that White America was getting hipper.” Charles was flattered
that some singers sounded so much like him they must have slept with
e his records beneath their pillows. After all, he had done much the
z same thing as a young performer, never thinking twice about imitating
8 Nat King Cole or feeling bad “about copying the cat’s licks.”5°
eB Black songwriters occasionally profited from covers by white
4 artists, either by selling the rights to their music or by earning royal-
e ties from record sales. When Georgia Gibbs, “a nice Jewish girl,”
8 copied (and Cloroxed) LaVern Baker’s “Tweedle Dee,” songwriter
Z Winfield Scott “was torn. I had to think two ways.... As a writer,
s you think, ‘Gee, I have another record? so here’s a chance to secure a
3 bigger income. And again, I had to feel, ‘Wow, this must be devastat-
2 ing to LaVern? because her record came out first, now here comes
. the cover, and all of a sudden she fades into obscurity. And I didn’t
© know how to deal with that.”3!
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 18 ---
iy) ALL SHOOK UP
Many black artists covered songs, sometimes reaching back into
the 1920s and ’30s for material. Fats Domino’s “Blueberry Hill” was
introduced by Gene Autry and made a hit by the Glenn Miller
Orchestra; Domino’s “Corinna Corrina” covered a black artist, Cab
Calloway, who recorded the song in 1933; “My Blue Heaven” was
written by Walter Donaldson in 1927. “In the Still of the Night,’ a Five
Satins hit, was written by Cole Porter and first sung by Nelson Eddy;
the Orioles’ “Crying in the Chapel” an R&B and pop smash in 1953,
was a cover of a country song by Darrell Glenn. In 1956, the Cadets
covered Elvis Presley’s “Heartbreak Hotel,” as the flip side of
“Church Bells May Ring.”32
Sometimes, it was difficult to determine who was covering whom.
“Hound Dog” was written by Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller, two whites
with a passion for black culture, who hung out in black neighborhoods
in the late ’40s, listening to R&B. They showed the song to Johnny Otis,
the son of a Greek immigrant grocer, who played drums in several
black bands in Watts and West Oakland, California. Married to a black
woman, Otis had rock ’n’ roll shows on three Los Angeles television
stations in the ’50s. White, Asian, black, and Hispanic kids attended
the dances he promoted. In fact, some fans thought he was black. Otis
showed the song to Willie Mae (“Big Mama”) Thornton, who recorded
it, with Otis taking composing credit. Elvis made substantial changes
to the tempo and lyrics of “Hound Dog,” and his version made it to
3 number 1 on both the country and R&B charts. Although Leiber and
: Stoller wrote the song, Greil Marcus insists that it is a black tune,
2 “probably a rewrite of an old piece of juke joint fury.”35
z At least once a cover advanced the fortunes of a black rock ’n’ roll
2 singer. In 1951, Randy Wood, owner of a record store in Gallatin, Ten-
eB nessee that specialized in country music and rhythm and blues,
é established an independent label, Dot Records. Dot featured white
e pop singers covering R&B songs. In 1955, the company produced two
8 big hits: a cover of “Hearts of Stone,” by the Fontane Sisters, who had
Z appeared frequently with Perry Como, reached number 1 on the pop
x charts; and Gale Storm, star of the TV sitcom My Little Margie, made
3 it to number 2 with “I Hear You Knockin’, an R&B song, first
2 recorded by Smiley Lewis and Dave Bartholomew. In search of the
. trifecta for 55, Wood asked Pat Boone to record “Ain’t That a Shame,”
° Fats Domino’s new hit.
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 19 ---
Rock ’n’ Roll and Race bg
il a
a eR faa
Le a Far
ip ER
A \ =
me,
| >”
- >
|
le
Cate E : é
Willie Mae “Big Mama” Thornton recorded “Hound
Dog” before Elvis did. (Michael Ochs Archives)
3 At twenty-one, Boone was already a veteran of Ted Mack’s Original
Amateur Hour, Arthur Godfrey’s Talent Scouts, and a radio show of
£ his own in Nashville. Boone was a clean-cut crooner who sported
= argyle socks, white buck shoes, and a bachelor’s degree from Colum-
z bia University. Although he was a native of the South, Boone knew
5 little about rhythm and blues. When Wood got him to listen to “Two
¢ Hearts,” by the Charms, Boone wondered whether the phonograph
© was running at the right speed. Nonetheless, with the help of a pol-
3 ished arrangement, a big band background, and a chorus scat of
= “bop-a-do-do-wop” during instrumental interludes, Boone turned
6 “Ain’t That a Shame”—and himself—“into a “coast to coast rock and
2 roll sensation.”
= The cover also breathed new life into Fats Domino’s version. While
a “Ain’t That a Shame” (Boone wanted to make the title “Isn’t That a
° Shame”), reached number 1 on Billboard’s pop chart, Domino’s “Ain’t
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 20 ---
54 ALL SHOOK UP
That a Shame” climbed to ro. Years later, as he sat in the audience at
a concert in New Orleans, Boone was invited on the stage by the Fat
Man, who pointed to the diamond rings on each of his fingers and
said, “This man bought me this ring with this song.” Domino and
Boone then performed “Ain’t That a Shame” together.34
Fats Domino was not the only African-American singer to con-
sciously court the crossover market. Clyde McPhatter, the Platters, and
Sam Cooke, among others, attracted white audiences, using melodic,
highly orchestrated styles and old standards to do so. Sometimes, the
strategy worked. In 1956, with only one exception, original rhythm and
blues songs outsold covers. Four of nine Top Ten hits, including “Blue-
berry Hill” were not covered in that year. The lesser hits confirm the
pattern. With thirteen of them, the original either outperformed the
cover or was not covered. Only two covers did better than the origi-
nals. During the rest of the decade, as the majors began to exploit rock
’n’ roll, covers surged back, though a few black performers held their
own with original versions.>5
Although some resourceful and talented African Americans
enriched themselves through rock ’n’ roll, the music industry in the
1950s remained, as LeRoi Jones (later Amiri Baraka) put it, “the har-
nessing of Black energy for dollars by white folks.” Broadcast Music
Incorporated (BMI) gave black artists far better copyright protection
than its Tin Pan Alley-dominated rival, the American Society of Com-
3 posers and Performers (ASCAP), but many were tricked or pressured
into signing exploitative contracts. In the 1940s and ’50s, lawyer
e Howard Begle discovered that most contracts to blacks paid royalties
z at the rock bottom rate of between 1 and 4 percent of the retail price
8 of the record or, even worse, provided a one-time payment of $200 for
eg records that generated hundreds of thousands or millions of dollars
4 in sales.36
e In 1955, for example, Leonard Chess told Chuck Berry to sign what
8 he called “a standard contract.” Berry did not understand such phrases
Z as “residuals from mechanical rights,” “writer’s and producer’s per-
5 centages,” and “performance royalties and publisher fees.” When he
3 saw the word “copyright” several times, Berry was reassured “that it
= was connected with the United States government, it was legitimate,
a and I was likely protected.” After all, his father had frequently told him
© that no one could “take your achievements from you when they’re
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 21 ---
Rack ’a’ Roll and Race 55
patented and copyrighted.” When he received his first royalty state-
ment for “Maybellene,” Berry noticed that Alan Freed and a disc
jockey named Russ Fratto were listed as co-composers of the song.
Chess told him that the song would get more attention if big names in
the industry had an interest in it. “With me being unknown,’ Berry
recalled, “this made sense to me, especially since he failed to mention
that there was a split in the royalties as well.”57

Berry’s experience was by no means an anomaly, even among suc-
cessful black artists. Colonel Tom Parker, Elvis Presley’s manager, in-
sisted that Otis Blackwell share songwriting credits with Elvis for “All
Shook Up” and “Don’t Be Cruel.” Blackwell was angry but then “real-
ized that songwriters who’d been in the business much longer than I
had, and who were much better off financially, were going along with
this. Some people would even have paid to have a song done by Elvis.
So I figured what the hell. And I can’t complain about how I made out.”
The payola hearings at the end of the decade would demonstrate that
assigning copyrights in this manner was “established practice” in the in-
dustry. Dick Clark, for example, held copyrights on more than 150
songs, ranging from “Let’s Go to the Hop,’ by Danny and the Juniors, to
the flip side of Paul Anka’s gold record “Diana” to the Crests’ “Sixteen
Candles.” African Americans were by no means the only victims of
these practices, but they suffered disproportionately from them.*8

At their worst, covers involved outright theft, with whole arrange-

3 ments lifted from black records. Ruth Brown “wasn’t so upset about
: other singers copying my songs because that was their privilege, and
2 they had to pay the writers of the song,” but when they copied “the
z style, the whole idea,” Brown felt violated. With the help of BMI,
2 artists did fight back. They pressured WINS, a music radio station in
eB New York City, to distinguish between “copy” and “cover” records and
4 stop playing those that lifted without alteration distinctive vocal or
e instrumental styles. “Imitation may be the sincerest form of flattery,’
8 LaVern Baker quipped, “but that kind of flattery I can do without.”
Z After Baker complained that Georgia Gibbs had copied her rendition
5 of “Tweedlee Dee,’ including the “odd rhythm beat,’ Congressman
3 Charles Diggs Jr. introduced a bill to prevent performers from dupli-
2 cating arrangements on original releases of records.59
. African Americans lacked the clout, however, to curtail the cover
© trade, which was particularly threatening to them because most disc
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 22 ---
56 ALL SHOOK UP
jockeys and owners of radio stations, in the North as well as the South,
preferred to play the music of white performers and major record
labels. When a record was covered, Cash Box claimed, “many jockeys
immediately switch as soon as it is available.” Dependent on radio
exposure, black performers were at a competitive disadvantage
throughout the decade.*°
Music historian Jonathan Kamin has documented the dispropor-
tionate airplay bestowed on white covers. Between 1952 and 1956, for
example, whenever radio gatekeepers had a choice, they played a
cover more and an R&B original less than their relative positions on
the charts merited. Although “Earth Angel,” by the black vocal group
the Penguins, was on the Billboard pop Top Ten for a month in 1955,
it was never higher than thirteenth among the most frequently played
records in the United States. At the same time, the Crew Cuts cover
of the song, which was fourteenth on the charts, was one of the ten
most frequently aired records. Johnny Ace’s “Pledging My Love” suf-
fered the same fate. Although it was seventeenth on Billboard’s list
when Teresa Brewer’s cover was released in March 1955, ten places
higher than Brewer’s, radio stations stopped playing the original. One
final example should suffice. In 1956, “Why Do Fools Fall In Love?,”
by Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers, spent a month on the charts,
rising to number 9, before it appeared on radio’s most-played list.
Gale Storm’s cover got a big boost from radio, becoming the ninth
3 most played record when it was number nineteen on Billboard’s pop
5 listing.4!
g To retain and regain their hold on the white pop market, many
= black rock ’n’ rollers utilized a sweeter sound, a smoother look, and
3 more soothing lyrics. The phenomenon Cash Box called “rhythm and
eB happies” helps explain the success of African-American performers in
4 1956; it was used by virtually every black singer who reached the charts
c during the rest of the decade. Glittering in their tuxedos, crooning
8 “whitened” ballads like “Only You” and “Twilight Time” that resem-
5 bled pop hits from the 1930s, the “doo-wop” group the Platters, for
x example, connected again and again with millions of fans.42
3 The African-American rock ’n’ rollers who crossed over to the pop
2 mainstream did not sing songs that were explicitly about black life or
. the social, economic, and political realities of the 1950s. In 1956, Cash
° Box boasted that when the ballad “The Death of Emmett Till” was
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 23 ---
Rock “a” Roll and Race 57
played on WGES radio, the telephone company in Chicago reported
8,394 busy signals, virtually all of them listeners trying to contact the
station. There was no rock ’n’ roll equivalent of “The Death of Emmett
Till.” Nor did any rock ’n’ roll headliner publicly condemn President
Eisenhower for his halfhearted attempts to desegregate Little Rock
Central High School, as jazz man Louis Armstrong did. Moreover,
rock ’n’ roll songs occasionally presented stereotypes of blacks, as
comic figures (“Charlie Brown”), superstitious (“Witch Doctor”), with-
out sexual restraint (“Shimmy Shimmy Ko Ko Bop”), and, as late as
1963, addicted to watermelon (“Watermelon Man”).45
As happened so often in African-American culture, racial references
in rock ’n’ roll were below the surface, confined to subtexts, in coded
language. As slaves, blacks had learned that they might be able to sing
what they could not say. The venerable Negro refrain set forth the
strategy: “Got one mind for folks to see / Nother for what I know is
me; / He don’t know, he don’t know my mind.” With their 1955 hit
“The Great Pretender,’ for example, the Platters used lyrics reminis-
cent of Ralph Ellison’s great novel Invisible Man. In the white world,
they implied, blacks wore masks: “Oh yes, I’m the great pretender / Just
laughing and gay like a clown/I seem to be what I’m not, you see / I’m
wearing my heart like a crown.”44
Although the race of the protagonist is never identified, some black
listeners may have responded to “The Great Pretender” as the story
3 of the double lives of African Americans. But as they slow-danced to
the song, white teenagers, with few exceptions, probably thought it the
e sad reflection of a lovesick young man, putting up a brave front (“pre-
z tending that you’re still around”), and then feeling what his “heart
g can’t conceal:” his girl has left him “to dream all alone.”
eg Perhaps the best way to assess how rock ’n’ roll both accommo-
é dated to and challenged the status quo in race relations is through an
e examination of the careers of Little Richard Penniman and Chuck
8 Berry, who, along with Fats Domino, were the most successful
Z African-American rock ’n’ rollers. In distinctly different ways, Berry
8 and Little Richard struggled with black identity and culture, onstage
2 and in their music, as they consciously adopted styles and subject mat-
= ters that appealed to a predominantly white audience.
a Born in Macon, Georgia, in 1932, Richard Penniman sang in a Bap-
© tist church choir as a youngster and traveled with his family’s gospel
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 24 ---
58 ALL SHOOK UP

troupe, the Penniman Family. Little Richard claimed that his family
did not like rhythm and blues, preferring Bing Crosby, “Pennies from
Heaven,’ and Ella Fitzgerald. Even as a kid, he “knew there was some-
thing that could be louder than that, but I didn’t know where to find
it. And I found it was me.” According to one of his brothers, Richard
hollered all the time: “I thought he couldn’t sing, anyway, just a noise,
and he would get on our nerves hollerin’ and beating on tin cans and
things of that nature. People around would get angry and upset with
him yelling and screaming.”

Ostracized by his friends and family, probably because they sus-
pected that he was a homosexual, Penniman left home when he was
fourteen to join Dr. Hudson’s Medicine Show. He then signed on to
sing with B. Brown and His Orchestra and also performed in drag in
a minstrel show, “Sugar Foot Sam from Alabam.” Using rhythm and
blues singer Billy Wright as his model, he designed the look that would
become his signature style: “I copied him as far as dressing, the hairdo
and the makeup, ’cause he was the only man I ever seen wearing
makeup before.” At the same time, he worked as a dishwasher at the
Greyhound bus station. In the South in the 1940s, a black knew that
it was most unwise to talk back to his boss, so when insulted Penni-
man masked his anger with the nonsense response “Wop Bop a Loo
Bop a Lop Bam Boom.”

By the early ’50s Little Richard had recorded several records,

3 including a modest hit, “Every Hour.” He had his own band, the
5 Upsetters, and made “a darned good living” on the road in Georgia,
g Tennessee, and Kentucky. One of his most successful numbers, espe-
z cially with white audiences, was “Tutti Frutti,” a wild, gay song, whose
3 raunchy lyrics included the lines “Tutti Frutti, good booty / If it don’t
eB fit, don’t force it / You can grease it, / make it easy.”
4 In 1955, hoping to break through to a national audience, Little
c Richard went to New Orleans to record for Specialty Records. With
8 hair a foot high, according to Robert “Bumps” Blackwell, Specialty’s
5 artists and repertoire man, Richard wore a shirt that “was so loud it
x looked as though he had drunk raspberry juice, cherryade, malt, and
2 greens, and then thrown up all over himself.” But when he auditioned
2 for Blackwell, the shouter who had attracted Specialty’s attention did
. not shout. Since “Tutti Frutti” did not strike him as suitable for the
° session, Richard spent two days, much to Blackwell’s consternation,
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 25 ---
Rock *n’ Roll and Race 9
singing desultory arrangements of the slow song “Lonesome and
Blue” and Leiber and Stoller’s “Kansas City.” During a lunch break at
a local establishment, the Dew Drop Inn, Little Richard jumped onto
the bandstand and launched into “Tutti Frutti” yelling, “Awop-bop-a-
Loo-Mop a-good Goddam.” Blackwell thought the song might be a
hit but also knew that the lyrics had to be changed, and quickly,
because the musicians and the studio were booked only for the
remainder of the day.

Blackwell contacted Dorothy La Bostrie, a young African-American
songwriter, to rewrite. At first, Little Richard balked, claiming he was
too embarrassed to sing the song to a woman. La Bostrie seemed
equally uncomfortable. With time running out, Blackwell asked Little
Richard “if he had a grudge against making money” and reminded La
Bostrie that she was twenty-one, had several kids, and needed the

f ; Beebe be Be
a |: BCE ie
Roamch & a Bie Be ah
ain 5 iol
; Sey VT Pee
~bey “4 1 LS . ~ re, mm
r 4 5 : fi ‘>. i , , er:
4 |) Bike SVE ee
} ee - : \ ‘ : - ;
, i; LA = pas Me F LAG a ied
| GO a Wate ee
é : VA) ’ “ti Pe TTLE , nb a Cp i
5 j YP a RicHanD 4 dN
= bes) en |
8 a ' i Ss — : ™ 4 a y
3 . IN PS
8 \ “
3s ‘ ; é
ae
|
= “Little Richard” Penniman was a brash, flamboyant rock ’n’ roll shouter
8 whose songs “Tutti Frutti” and “Long Tall Sally” became hits even though
their lyrics were sanitized. (Michael Ochs Archives)
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 26 ---
G0 ALL SHOOK UP
income: “Richard turned to face the wall and sang the song two or
three times and Dorothy listened.” A few hours later, the lyrics had
been changed to “I got a gal named Sue/ She knows just what to
do / She rocks me to the east / She rocks me to the west / She’s the gal
I love best.” While a sax-packed band pulsated with energy, Little
Richard embellished the words of “Tutti Frutti” with screams, squeals,
rasps, or sirens, in effect exhorting listeners to get loose and go crazy.
The only performer Blackwell knew “who would beat the piano so
hard he’d break an eighty-gauge piano string,” Richard accompanied
himself for what turned out to be two and a half minutes that made
rock ’n’ roll history.
Art Rupe, the owner of Specialty, did not like the song. He expected
Little Richard to produce the “big band sound expressed in a churchy
way,’ characteristic of mid-’50s black rock ’n’ rollers. With little enthu-
siasm, Rupe finally agreed to distribute “Tutti Frutti.” Little Richard
was also convinced that the song would not be a hit, even with sani-
tized lyrics. They miscalculated. Little Richard became an exception
to the “rule” that whites would not accept a black shouter. Within
weeks, “Tutti Frutti” reached number 2 on the R&B charts. Despite
almost no radio airplay, the song also climbed to number 18 on the
pop charts. Over the next three years, Little Richard gave Specialty
eleven more hits, including “Long Tall Sally” (1956), “Keep a
Knockin’” (1957) and “Good Golly, Miss Molly” (1958).45
8 Little Richard brought manic energy and showmanship to live
3 performances and records. He was brash and bombastic, telling
5 audiences, “I’m just the same as ever—loud, electrifying, and full of
4 personal magnetism” and “That piano was talkin’ and the drums was
g walkin’. It made my big toe shoot up in my boot.” Before Liberace
3 went campy, Little Richard appeared with a puffed-up pompadour,
4 heavy makeup, capes, and blousy shirts, prancing across the stage and
e letting loose a “Woooo” that Paul McCartney heard across the Atlantic
3 and adapted to the music of the Beatles.46
2 There was, he subsequently recalled, a racially motivated method
6 to his madness. In the 1950s, a terrible fate awaited a black man who
S was seen as sexually attractive to white women. To appear safe, Little
z Richard donned “eyelashes longer than Josephine Baker’s” and his
é way-out platform persona. “By wearing this makeup,’ he claimed, “I
could work and play white clubs, and the white people didn’t mind
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 27 ---
Rock ’n’ Roll and Race GI
the white girls screaming over me. ... They was willing to accept me,
‘cause they figured I wouldn’t be no harm.”47
Although Little Richard’s explanation may have been designed, in
part, to hide his ambivalence about his homosexuality, black rock ’n’
rollers in the 1950s knew the dangers of appearing to be sexually
threatening to whites. Part of the appeal of the juvenile “doo-wop”
groups, no doubt, was that they were romantic but presexual. Even so,
when fourteen-year-old Frankie Lymon, whose hit “Why Do Fools
Fall in Love?” (with the Teenagers) was typical of the genre, impul-
sively grabbed a white girl as a dance partner at the end of Alan
Freed’s Rock ’n’ Roll Dance Party on ABC-TV in 1957, thirteen affili-
ates, not all of them in the South, canceled the program, which was
soon dropped by the network. That Fats Domino resembled Santa
Claus more than he did a sexual predator also accounts in no small
measure for his popularity with some white audiences. Still, according
to Russ Sanjek, later vice president of BMI, “it was a time when many
a mother ripped pictures of Fats Domino off her daughter’s bedroom
wall. She remembered what she felt toward her Bing Crosby pinup,
and she didn’t want her daughter creaming for Fats.”48
Perhaps because of his presentation of self, Little Richard was not,
at least in the mainstream press, perceived as a sexually threatening
black or a homosexual. In Billboard, for example, Ben Walstein, the
author of Transference in Psychoanalytic Therapy, pronounced rock
3 ’n’ roll an essentially harmless response to teenagers’ sometimes
: frustrating search for an identity. Acknowledging that he had
e difficulty making “out what the words are” in Little Richard’s song
z “Long Tall Sally,” Walstein opined that the singer’s “use of falsetto is
8 significant because here we have an expression of a kind of problem
eB all adolescents have, and that is the attempt to struggle through
4 the period where all males, for instance, are trying to achieve some
e kind of masculine identification, and I think that this falsetto ex-
8 pression is it.”49
Z Nonetheless, the sexual energy exuded by Little Richard made many
x Americans in the ’50s anxious or angry. “Long Tall Sally,’ after all, was
3 banned in Houston. So Specialty Records tried hard to assure white
2 adults that Little Richard was harmless. In the liner notes for his
. second LP, Specialty announced that the singer had included some
° old pop tunes along with his rock ’n’ roll hits “especially for his fans’
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 28 ---
62 ALL SHOOK UP
parents who may still not ‘dig the beat’ He feels that if only they’ll
listen to songs they remember like ‘Baby Face; and ‘By the Light of
the Silvery Moon) done up in the Little Richard style, they'll enjoy this
new album, too.”5°
As Little Richard shaped his public persona to accommodate a mass
audience, Chuck Berry considered whether (and how) to express musi-
cally the antiauthoritarianism he shared with some ’50s teenagers. An
ambitious performer, Berry, like Little Richard, was willing to adapt his
music to reach white listeners, but beneath his endorsements of happi-
ness, success, and fun, and his portrait of school as jail, he looked for
ways to give voice to black culture and social aspiration. Born in San
Jose, California, in 1926, and raised in St. Louis, Missouri, in a pleasant
one-family brick home in a black middle-class neighborhood, Berry
sang in the Antioch Baptist Church choir and in the glee club of his
high school, where a music teacher encouraged him to play the guitar.
He listened at home on the radio to a range of musical styles, from
gospel to country to ballads. In the 1980s, Berry rewrote history to
stress the formative influence of white singers on his sound: “I never
heard Muddy Waters. I never heard Elmore James, Howling Wolf, I
never heard ‘em. I heard Frank Sinatra, I heard Pat Boone, you know
Pat Boone doing Muddy Waters or whoever’s numbers. ... And I said
now can I do as Pat Boone does and play good music for the white peo-
ple and sell as well there as I could in the neighborhood. And that’s
3 what I shot for.” In fact, Boone did not cover any Muddy Waters song
5 and did not have his first hit until 1955, long after Berry’s career had
g been launched. On other occasions, and more accurately, Berry ac-
z knowledged his debt to Louis Jordan: “I have a lot of flighty things, like
3 Louis had, comical things and natural things, not too heavy.”5!
eB Despite a supportive home environment, Berry was a troubled
4 young man who was convicted of armed robbery and spent some time
c in a reformatory. After his release, he worked on a factory assembly
8 line and then as a hairdresser. In 1951, he bought an electric guitar,
5 the “first really good looking instrument” he owned. He found it
8 “much easier to finger the frets” and was delighted that, with an
3 amplifier, it could be easily heard. A year later, Berry began his career
2 as a professional musician, forming a trio with the great boogie-
3 woogie pianist Johnnie Johnson and drummer Ebby Harding. At the
° Cosmopolitan Club in East St. Louis, Berry worked country music
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 29 ---
Rock *n’ Roll and Race 53
into his repertoire. The audience response, especially from whites, was
extremely enthusiastic. “Salt and pepper mixed together” at the club,
with whites constituting almost half of the clientele. To please the
crowd, Berry changed the way he sang: “I stressed my diction so that
it was harder and whiter. ... It was my intention to hold both the
black and white clientele by voicing the different songs in their cus-
tomary tongues.”52

The most popular song at the Cosmo was Berry’s improvised ver-
sion of “Ida Red,” an up-tempo dance number recorded by country
singer Roy Acuff in 1939. With encouragement from Muddy Waters,
Berry in 1955 brought to Chess Records a tape of the tune he now
called “Ida May” and a blues song he had written, “Wee Wee Hours,”
inspired by Joe Turner’s “Wee Baby Blue.” To Berry’s surprise, Leonard
Chess showed little interest in the blues material but waxed enthusi-
astic about the commercial possibilities in a hillbilly song “written and
sung by a black guy.” Chess wanted a bigger beat for the song and
added a bass and maraca player to the trio at the recording session.
He also thought Berry’s title, “Ida May,” “too rural.” Spotting a mas-
cara box on the floor of the studio, according to Johnnie Johnson,
Chess said, “Well, hell, let’s name the damn thing Maybellene;,’ alter-
ing the spelling to avoid a suit by the cosmetics company. “The kids
wanted the big beat, cars, and young love,’ Chess recalled. “It was a
trend and we jumped on it.”

3 With Alan Freed (to whom Chess assigned one-third of the song-
5 writing credits and royalties) promoting the song on his radio program,
g “Maybellene” became one of the first records to reach number one on
z the rhythm and blues, country and western, and pop charts. Featuring
3 some inimitable Chuck Berry riffs, some blues-style picking on a coun-
eB try guitar, and Johnson’s piano, which added a hummable rhythm to
4 the steady backbeat, “Maybellene” constituted a defining moment in
c the emergence of rock ’n’ roll. As Chess had predicted, the song struck
8 a chord with teenagers fascinated by cars, speed, and sexuality. Berry
5 thought that because everybody had a car “or dreams about one,’ they
x might well identify with the narrator of “Maybellene”: “As I was motor-
3 vatin’ over the hill, / I saw Maybellene in a Coupe de Ville. / Cadillac
e rollin’ on the open road, / Tryin’ to outrun my V-8 Ford.”3
. Recipient of the Cash Box and Billboard awards for the most
° promising artist of 1955, Berry began to understand how well he had
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 30 ---
| gee ES Seer ;
| Le ae ae
| ; an 2 ee eee ek
| a 2S eee
f - ao eS ae
: i Seren ee
: Ad A ae
5 RT eA gece dd Pee ei
oes m4 So Wea 42% ae P
243,485 ae a 4 Ag ey
SIs Sree page eg Ts]
Vio S get eet ee i el
2 Be eire Saag mee
MS Sg Pe hie aril
02 Fg guetta vais
5 SPER
= gd site ae or tee S|
eae Shy cea
gs Rare Be ve
(2 any Senge Jogi con ate
\ poh iit be aks |
V8 Sees bret
eae saan
; aeede  t% ina ay
i Se eet Ree
: ! Loe iE aS eas |
«TR SRR eet ae aaa
77 AS Ba optet bk ;
ee. ae ig. Peete
Teen aa ee
(oa ee eae
ase
i Ap RG ae Sasa
PEF + hy Se Na Se: ears
i gE Ges 8 oe
bey Saas Sy
ee ahs € 7 eee ee nx *, %
1S —— { eg
—— | ie Weee-m ae |. Ct
. *
“a. oa uaa is ae ae
\-— ' -
‘ aes ah . pecle Hate:
2 ae * re kee
| Te eR ees
3 i S Pa ae By
$ oe, MS ty Sahota
a Pood 7 >
8 ass oo. a eo
a A aes
5 eae al ry
= :
3 1
2
oO
5 eee
Q + s
B Rar ty - A. pee, 8 — Re Bs x. eres ce Re Pe
2 Rapa eer tr Ha a Oe ree ae teed AS
5 eee eee Ee BEY ca ee
a
8 Chuck Berry’s lyrics to songs like “Brown-Eyed Handsome Man” played
2 : : ’ 5
5 slyly with racial attitudes and even fears. (Michael Ochs Archives)
=
5
¢
So
=)
N
©
=
a
5
$
Oo
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 31 ---
Rock *n’ Roll and Race 65
connected with whites. At an appearance before a “solid white audi-
ence” at the Brooklyn Paramount Theater in September 1955, he was
moved by the ecstatic response he received: “I doubt that many Cau-
casian persons would come into a situation that would cause them to
know the feeling a black person experiences after being reared under
old-time southern traditions and then finally being welcomed by an
entirely unbiased and friendly audience, applauding without apparent
regard for racial difference.”54

Berry became one of rock ’n’ roll’s first and greatest superstars. His
hits included such classics as “Roll Over Beethoven” (1956), “Rock ’n’
Roll Music” (1957), “School Days” (1957), “Sweet Little Sixteen” (1958),
and “Johnny B. Goode” (1958). Berry’s trademark “duck walk,” in
which he glided across the stage with knees bent, his guitar held in
front of him, made him one of the most sought-after performers on
the live concert circuit. As they celebrated material things, while blam-
ing work or school for preventing people from pursuing pleasure, his
hits were the perfect vehicle for the aspiring but unsettled generation
of the 1950s.

Yet Berry crafted his songs to carry other meanings as well. The lan-
guage he used in “School Days,’ for example, consciously invoked the
black gospel tradition. As they celebrate the liberating power of music
(“Hail! Hail! Rock and Roll, / Deliver me from the days of old / The
feeling is there, body and soul”) the lyrics hint at oppression and

3 deliverance, with a race consciousness recognizable to anyone famil-
: iar with African-American religion. The opening lines of “Brown-Eyed
2 Handsome Man” (1956) seem to promise a racialized discussion as
z well, this time of economic oppression and sexual power: “Arrested
2 on charges of unemployment / he was sitting in the witness stand / the
eB judge’s wife called up the district attorney / said free that brown-eyed
4 man.” In the remainder of the song, Berry moves across time and con-
e tinents, touching on Bombay and baseball, myth and love, but never
8 again on joblessness or justice in the United States. Nonetheless,
Z “Brown-Eyed Handsome Man” celebrates the sexual allure of black
x men “ever since the world began.” In the narrative, even the Venus de
3 Milo, exemplar of the beautiful white woman, “lost both her arms in
2 a wrestling match / to win a brown-eyed handsome man.” At the end
. of the song, as a young woman tries to “make up her mind / between
Oo

Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.

Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.

--- Page 32 ---
66 ALL SHOOK UP
a doctor and a lawyer man,’ her mother has only one piece of advice:
“go out and find yourself a brown-eyed handsome man.”55
Berry intended to be more explicit with “Johnny B. Goode,” the
story of an illiterate, impoverished man, living “deep down in
Louisiana” and dreaming of wealth and fame. Unlike John Henry or
Stack O’Lee, mythic black heroes of another era, Johnny does not defy
an oppressive system. He can win recognition from whites as well as
blacks, Berry optimistically suggests, simply by demonstrating his
genius with a guitar. But Berry did not make Johnny “a little colored
boy,’ as he had in the original version of the song. Concerned that “it
would seem biased to white fans,” he made him a “little country boy”
and, in a sense, invited listeners to see the song as a paean to careers
open to talent in the United States, unrelated to race.56
Chuck Berry’s experiences illuminate the opportunities for and
complications with conducting a conversation about race through
rock ’n’ roll in the 1950s. As they made him a star, millions of Ameri-
cans proved that they were ready to idolize an African American. And
in Berry’s live concerts, “salt and pepper” did mix together. At the
same time, record producers and concert promoters robbed the per-
former of a substantial amount of the fruits of his labor, continuing a
pattern of exploitation of blacks that spanned the century after “eman-
cipation.” For good reason, Berry remained an angry and suspicious
man, insisting that he be paid in cash. He had, after all, been burned
3 before, and his confidence that hard-working, talented blacks would,
5 eventually, win the respect of whites was tempered by the recognition
g that racial discrimination was far more difficult to eradicate than
z segregation. Unwilling to risk losing his white audience by confronting
3 racial issues directly, he persisted in exploring black identity, but only
eB with those ready to face the music. Like many of his contemporaries
4 in the 1950s, like rock ’n’ roll as a whole, Berry advanced a racial
c agenda but moved forward with “all deliberate speed.”57
:
§
Altschuler, G. C., & Altschuler (2004). All shook up : How rock 'n' roll changed america. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-09-06 13:04:31.
