--- Page 1 ---
CHAPTER 10
Soul |
Portia K. Maultsby
Soul is a form of urban Black popular music, derived from rhythm
and blues of the 1950s, that crystallized in the late 1960s and peaked
in the mid-1970s. Its distinctive sound is characterized by the incor-
poration of the rhythms, musical and formal structures, and vocal
stylings of Black gospel music. These elements gradually dominated
or replaced the blues, jazz, and pop elements associated with the 1950s
rhythm and blues styles. The lyrics of soul maintained the topics of
romance and social relationships and expanded topical coverage to
include social and political commentary inspired by the Civil Rights
and Black Power Movements. Thus soul music is defined by both its
lyric content and musical features.
Early soul styles paralleled the broad popularity of the prevailing
Black gospel music and coincided with the beginning of the 1950s
Civil Rights Movement. Music was central to this movement: spiri-
tuals, gospel music, and rhythm and blues provided the core reper-
toire, which singers transformed into freedom songs during sit-ins,
marches, and freedom rides. The result was the further blurring of Black Power
: a Ae si Movement
the sacred-secular boundaries within these political contexts.! Amovemoaradt
In the mid-1960s, the Black Power Movement took root. It was the late 1960s
spearheaded by college-age members of the Student Non-Violent 44 early 1970s
Coordinating Committee (SNCC) who became increasingly disillu- phat emphasized
sioned with the slow pace of social change promoted by its parent Black unity,
organization, Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). Black pride,
Many of SNCC’s members rejected the nonviolent and integra- and self-
tionist approach advocated by traditional civil rights leaders. Asan — determination.
271

--- Page 2 ---
alternative, a core group of SNCC’s membership embraced the Black and gave vali
Nationalist ideology of Malcolm X, a concept that promoted Black such as “ain’
solidarity, Black pride, self-determination, and self-empowerment. pening, baby.
In 1966, they substituted the “Freedom Now” slogan with “Black “dig it” over t
Soul music Power.” Soul music crystallized in this context.” This chapter chron- wes sant idead
Gospel- icles the emergence and development of soul music and its meaning, of “saul me
influenced function, and significance in Black community life. The langi
African American
: culture throu
gl THESE SE SE fh MNCs ed ON or LAGI POMaER Curtis Mayfi
style that began yale
to emerge in the The concept of Black Power encompassed a broad social, poli- Man” (1967)
late 1950s and tical, economic, and cultural agenda. Kwame Ture (aka Stokely Bar-Kays. Des
became popular Carmichael), one of the founders of this movement, defined its Black Americ:
during the fundamental principles as: until 1967 wh
Teas ..the call for black people in this country to unite, to recognize their heritage, lished the firs
to build a sense of community. It is a call for black people to begin to define document “th
their own goals, to lead their own organizations and to support these organiza- In 1968, Esqu:.
tions. It is a call to reject the racist institutions and values of this society... The Soul” and Tir:
concept of Black Power rests ona fundamental premise: Before a group can enter caver as the »
the open society, it must first close ranks. By this we mean that group solidarity is :
necessary before a group can operate effectively from a bargaining position of It Like It Is.” I.
strength in a pluralistic society.’ Blues” charts :
The call for Black Power evolved into a political movement to Be “dia wren
which Black people assigned cultural meanings they labeled “soul.” ; ;
a * . 8 & » sanctioned, ar
The term “soul” became a signifier of “blackness. cheieani “
Soul first became a household word in African American com- —s
munities during the inner-city uprisings (labeled “riots” by the media) THE ARCHITE
of 1964 (Harlem), 1965 (Watts), and 1967 (Detroit and Newark). —
To prevent possible destruction and looting, Black businessmen The pioneers .
identified their stores by displaying signs in the windows that read share commo:
“soul brother.” In 1965, Black disc jockeys across the country began their transfor:
identifying their Black-oriented stations as “soul radio,” which in- Although sor:
fluenced the national acceptance of this term.* The concept of soul, duced a gospe
as noted by historian William L. Van Deburg, “was closely related ing secular lvr.
to black America’s need for individual and group self-definition. Baby,” 1952), :
During the Black Power era, the self-defining capabilities of soul were cull range of «.
nowhere more evident than in the soul style that originated in and Slues, from sz:
was authenticated by the urban black folk culture.”* style. These ir.
Soul became associated with all forms of Black cultural pro- =imctive music.
duction: music, dance, visual art, foodways, fashion (colorful bell- Similar tc
bottom slacks with three-inch cuffs, leather vests, wide-brimmed of Mine” (195
hats, platform shoes, and African-derived clothing and accessories), of Mine,” ach
natural hair styles (Afros and African-derived crops and cornrows), -ompositiors.
non-verbal communication style (rhychmic and complex hand “ithout You"
shake greetings, a distinctive walk, and other inimitable body ges- veinterpretatic
tures). Soul also became associated with a unique language style of wn Tears” | 2
inner-city street talk and slang. Soul radio DJs broadly popularized replaced mam.
-rom Black ¢:
272. African American Music Saayp
po -
SUnSESEEnemmneeenee

--- Page 3 ---
and gave validity to this language style by superimposing phrases
such as “ain’t that the truth,” “tell it like it is,” “that’s what’s hap-
pening, baby,” “show me where it’s at,” “you'd better believe ir,” and
“dig it” over the music they played. In essence, soul signified the val- :
ues and ideals of a new Black identity that underscored the concept
of a “soul man,” “soul brother,” and “soul sister.” |
The language of soul became further infused in African American
culture through song titles such as “Woman’s Got Soul” (1965) by
Curtis Mayfield, “Memphis Soul Stew” (1967) by King Curtis, “Soul
Man” (1967) by Sam and Dave, and “Soul Finger” (1967) by the
Bar-Kays. Despite the earlier institutionalization of the term “soul” in |
Black America, the mass media did Not give full recognition to its use
until 1967 when Billboard, the leading trade music magazine, pub- |
lished the first issue of an annual series titled “The World of Soul” to
document “the impact of Blues and R&B upon our musical culture.”6
In 1968, Esquire magazine published an article “An Introduction to
Soul” and Time magazine (June 28) featured Aretha Franklin on its 4 |
cover as the subject of a lengthy article entitled “Lady Soul Singing —
It Like It Is.” In 1969, Billboard changed the name of its “Rhythm and
Blues” charts to “Soul.” This acceptance of the soul label by the mass 7
media and music industry signified an initial victory for the Black :
Power Movement. White Americans had adopted a term first coined, |
sanctioned, and used by African Americans to describe themselves, |
their unique cultural productions, and their cultural institutions,
THE ARCHITECTS AND MUSICAL ROOTS OF SOUL
The pioneers of soul—Ray Charles, James Brown, and Sam Cooke—
share common musical roots in Black gospel music, which inspired
their transformation of rhythm and blues into the sound of soul. 4 |
Although some of the early rhythm and blues vocal groups intro- }
duced a gospel quartet sound to Black popular music by substicut- i ;
ing secular lyrics for religious ones (e.g., The Dominoes’ “Have Mercy
Baby,” 1952), Ray Charles was the first to consistently incorporate a |
full range of components from Black church culture in rhythm and |
blues, from structure to harmony, rhythmic organization, and vocal 4
style. These innovations forged the evolution of soul music as a dis- j
tinctive musical genre in the 1960s. { |
Similar to the Dominoes, Charles’s recording of “This Little Girl |
of Mine” (1955) represents a secular version of “This Little Light )
of Mine,” achieved by simply changing the lyrics. In his original 4
compositions, including “Come Back” (1954), “What Would I Do 4
Without You” (1956), and “A Fool for You” (1955), as well as in his
reinterpretation of the 1952 rhythm and blues hit “Drown in My j |
Own Tears” (1956) by Sonny Thompson and Lula Reed, Charles had rr
-eplaced many blues-oriented thythm and blues elements with those 4 .
“rom Black gospel music. These songs are characterized by the use j i
] :
——
Soul 273 J
SUI irene

--- Page 4 ---
_
ee of 12/8 meter played with a 4/4 or common meter feel, call-response Saad Bi
4/4 time; structures, gospel harmonic progressions, and gospel vocal phrasing, oe
damecnies inflections, and melismas. A unique feature of “Drown in My Own ena 8 be
superimposed Tears” is the rhythm, which is based on the movements of the congre- oP Eo

over 12/8 gants of the Black folk church. David “Panama” Francis, the drum- eee
meter or triplet mer on this recording, explained how he used brushes rather than cate
background. sticks to capture the nuances of these movements: Boe
Call- . . . SoS
all-response Ray was the one who told me to play with brushes...and with a gospel feeling. .
A song . AILI played was straight quarter notes with brushes. If you remember, in the puede eee
form which church, that was the way the mothers used to keep the babies quiet on their Set
characterized knees when they were singing; all they did was lift their foot and then drop it— mrt:
many of just a straight 4/4,..And they'd be patting the baby and it would go right back a _
the earliest to sleep. And that’s what I was playing on the drums in “Drown in My Own : ae
documented Tears.” Ray suggested it and showed me how to do it, too.” na
spirituals. Also, Other gospel-inspired songs such as “What'd I Say” (1959) represent 6 8
% performance an amalgam of blues and gospel. Boe
ee oe ml Three years before Ray Charles released “What'd I Say,” James oe
which a singer or an Be
: ge Brown and the Flames recorded the ballad “Please, Please, Please” wee
instrumentalist . oe
. 1956), a song written by Brown and Flames member Johnny Terry. oo.
makes a musical 5 ; y y 2a
comeweni-v Gaels The song is based on the repetitive phrase “Please, Please, Please Lee.
is answered by Don’t Go,” which Brown performs in an intense, percussive, and :
another soloist, gospel-inflected vocal style similar to Clyde McPhatter, lead singer of a
| instrumentalist, the Dominoes, who had a major influence on Brown. Brown widely Lo.
or group. The popularized this vocal style in rhythm and blues and in soul music. Lee
statement In the area of musical arrangements, however, his innovations in the ,
and answer transition from rhythm and blues to soul came gradually. According ~ oe
sometimes to Brown, this change, which reflected a new rhythmic concep- -
avis 4 tion (polyrhythmic structures, or the layering of different rhythmic Soe
i © i patterns), began with “P'll Go Crazy” (1960) and “Think” (1960) and cae.
antiphony; call- ; j . 4
PSRP: crystallized on “Out of Sight” (1964): Loe
and-response. ot
Melisma You can hear the band and me start to move in a whole other direction rhyth-
A single syllable mically. The horns, the guitar, the vocals, everything was starting to be used StL
sung over several to establish all kinds of rhythms at once. On that record [“Out of Sight”] you _
: can hear my voice alternate with the horns to create various rhythmic accents. “ao.
pitches. eran ; : ; _
Iwas trying to get every aspect of the production to contribute to the rhythmic 7-7
Polyrhythm patterns. What most people don’t realize is that I had been doing the multiple i.
More than rhythm patterns for years on stage, but...[in the studio] I had agreed to make se
one rhythmic the rhychms on the records a lot simpler [due to technical limitations of record- "ee
pattern played ing equipment and the differences in aesthetic preferences of Brown and Syd 7
simultaneously. Nathan, the owner of Brown’s record label, King Records].* ae
In addition to Brown’s polyrhythmic musical foundation, his stu- oo
dio singing style gradually became more intense with the interjection =:
of vocables, screams, and hollers (“I Got You |I Feel Good],” 1965; “This ==
> > > >
Is a Man’s Man’s World,” 1966), which are a carryover from his stage
performances (James Brown ‘Live’ at the Apollo, 1962 and 1967).
A contrast to Brown’s intense and percussive vocal aesthetic was
the softer, lyrical, and melismatic style of Sam Cooke. Beginning -
274 African American Music

--- Page 5 ---
(orp lecerecnce ais trefessional singing career as lead vocalist (1950-1956) for the
inl Sipe = Sou: Stirrers, a renowned Black gospel quartet, Cooke switched from
a os vem Theaa gospel to rhythm and blues and recorded the hit “You Send Me”
ede aeiereteres (1957) in a gospel-oriented style. This song became a crossover hit,
=g a deren. reaching the number one position on Billboard’s “Rhythm and Blues”
$) none ge che and “Pop” charts. Seven years later, Cooke recorded “A Change Is
Gonna Come” (1964), in the year of the passage and signing of the
ae Civil Rights Act and of Cooke’s death. Many popular music scholars
oe es Bs contend this song marks the transition from rhythm and blues to
a kD 3 pha soul; it is performed in an unabashedly gospel style and its content
28.0 crop it— may be interpreted as a reflection of Cook’s social consciousness and
SE eit his expression of faith.
Throughout his career and as an admirer of Martin Luther King
Jr., Cooke demonstrated his racial] pride by challenging Jim Crow laws Jim Crow laws
‘iy represent and de facto segregation, the latter outside of and within the complex Laws limiting
of components—record labels, recording studios, publishing compa- African American
- 22." James nies, etc.—that comprised the music industry. Touring the South, he freedoms and
-=2:2. Please” protested the Jim Crow laws by canceling performances at segregated ights in U.S.
anny Terry. venues and attempting to register at White motels. Residing in Los S0“ety, named
.2ise, Please Angeles, Cooke experienced and challenged police harassment. He fr the minstrel
scussive, and ] d his dismay at the injustices of the music indust b eases
=e) also expressed his dismay yt s aaa ee
--25 singer of protesting the lack of African American musicians Participating on :
“Fn widely his recording sessions and by forming his own recording label (SAR) |
~ soul nS and publishing company (KAGS).? |
sons in the Musician and close friend Harold Battiste described “A Change Is
- According Gonna Come” as “...the culmination ofall their talk about race: one way
soon ROKER to express how he was feeling about what he needed to do.” Cooke’s
== rhythmic social consciousness and musical paradigm, together with the musical
+960) and innovations of Ray Charles and James Brown, provided the models for
the new musical genre that later would be defined as soul.
ftom rhyth-
ri: te used SOUL LYRICS, CIVIL RIGHTS, AND BLACK POWER
Sigh” a
flaeidn The release of Sam Cooke’s “A Change Is Gonna Come” coincided
"cn rhythmic with The Impressions’s recording “Keep On Pushing” (1964), which
> saamzaltiple articulated the feelings and thoughts of songwriter Curtis Mayfield
: apomake rd- (Figure 10.1) regarding racial injustices and the need for social change.
sand Syd The messages of several of Mayfield’s songs emerge from his personal
experiences of de facto segregation in Chicago, his commitment to
“ise. the. gtr the Civil Rights Movement, and the strong faith he developed grow-
-nterjection ing up in the Traveling Soul Spiritualistic Church pastored by his
965; “This grandmother. He explains:
=m. his stage As a young man I was writing songs like “Keep On Pushing” and “This Is
<7 My Country” and feeling all the love and all the things I observed politically.
esthetic was Of course with everything I saw on the streets asa young black kid, it wasn’t
£5 « cafthecrs ll hard during the later fifties and early sixties for me to write [in] my own
Pee Lng heartfelt way of how I visualized things, how I thought things ought to be.!!
Soul 275

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 10.1 Pusming
Curtis Mayfield in ; ok eww
a publicity photo, oa ous Re
| c. 1970s. Courtesy : ig
David A. Jasen. :/. Alrhc:
‘ . ‘ene pd oe Luther Ne:
- at fy) Black Po
= ah ae Lae well as Ext
te Bo \ fen 7 a relevance |
are \ 4 a aw amet activities >
- . ong ay _ activist re:
Pe _ < a 4 , “ x Power, Bu
‘ : be 3 ae gOnws ame
| } . ae Mave a
BY 5:
Many of Mayfield’s songs embody the religious message of —
sermons, spirituals, and gospel music heard in the Black church. capri meen
Acknowledging this influence, Mayfield implies that some of these songs ths
songs were first written as gospel songs and required only minor Lahm, 2
changes in the lyrics: “With ‘Keep On Pushing,’ all I needed to do was ye Sse
change ‘God gave me strength, and it don’t make no sense not to keep <Sanhiiggy
on pushing’ to ‘T’ve got my strength, and it don’t make sense.’ I’ve got ee
my strength. Nothing else needed to be changed.”” Similarly “People aide Bis
Get Ready” (1965), a song covered by gospel singer Shirley Caesar, as ames
emerged from Mayfield’s faith and his gospel vision. According to end eae
fans in attendance at a live concert in 1968, these songs, as well as * maa Ge
“We're a Winner” (1967), “This Is My Country” (1968), and “Choice of eaarelon”
Colors” (1969), gave inspiration. The popularity of Mayfield’s songs
among African Americans is evidenced by their Top 10 positions on met
the rhythm and blues charts.'* —
Despite the positive social messages, principles of faith, and the peceels
philosophy of Martin Luther King Jr. expressed in Mayfield’s songs, amens
some Black-oriented and many mainstream pop radio stations con- wmSPITE
sidered them to be too overtly political for broadcast. Considering the weet.
era, Mayfield acknowledges that an inspiring message “wasn’t really —_ - _
what radio was all about in those times.” However, as the Civil Rights _ o
Movement gained momentum beyond the southern states, and when __ “ a
Martin Luther King Jr. and Jesse Jackson adopted “Keep On Pushing” oe
as a protest song, Black-oriented radio began to broadcast the social ia
and political message of soul. Moreover, many Black DJs encouraged ~~ —
their listeners to hear the music politically.’ Chuck Scruggs of KSOL oO ;
in San Francisco explains: a
As a jock during that time I would take those message songs and add a line or Acrica A
two of editorial...something that would fit the title or the theme of the song.... fine * S
I didn’t play a message song in isolation, and then go from that to something Tepe VI
else that had no connection. I'd go from a message song like “Keep On cesT
276 African American Music boa

--- Page 7 ---
os ee
Pushing” to, say, “Stand by Me.” You see what I mean? I’'d make the transition
with words of hope for my listeners. You know—Stand by me people ’cause we
gotta keep on pushing for our freedom.!®
Although Mayfield subscribed to the philosophy of Martin
Luther King Jr., his lyrics also were inspired by the speeches of
Black Power advocates H. Rap Brown and Stokely Carmichael as
well as those of local preachers and leaders. Mayfield’s songs held
relevance across the ideological divide and became central to the
~ activities of both the Civil Rights and Black Power Movements. One |
activist recalled: “I started out with civil rights and moved to Black
< Power. But wherever I was, Curtis’s music was there.”!” Mayfield’s
songs and those of other soul singers that contained social and/
. or political messages became known as message songs and equated
* with the concept of soul. 7
By 1968, the Nationalist message of Black Power had begun to ;
aie of overshadow the integrationist ideology of the civil rights leaders; |
228 church. many soul singers became spokespersons for Black Power. Recording
ome of these songs that were considered to be overtly militant and musically
zaly es intense, James Brown led the way. Songs such as “Say It Loud—
“22 to do was I’m Black and I’m Proud” (1968), “I Don’t Want Nobody to Give Me
shins keep Nothing (Open up the Door I’ll Get it Myself)” (1969), and “Get Up,
aes, Tiegpt Get into It, and Get Involved” (1970) promoted the concept of Black
i “People pride, Black solidarity, and Black empowerment. Through these and
nen Caesar, the songs of other soul singers, Black America began to identify with
~ccording to and embrace these concepts. After Brown’s performance of “Say It
-. & well ant Loud” in Houston, Texas, less than two weeks after its release, his
= “Choice of musical arranger Fred Wesley Jr. recalls:
Tieid’s songs
= >sitions on ..[T]o my amazement when James hit the stage and yelled out, “Say it loud,”
. there must have been 15,000 people who answered back, “I’m black and ’m
, proud”....This record was very special. The message echoed the feelings of black
ath, and the people at that time. With the new civil rights bill and the new voting rights
7.2.d4’s songs, amendiment now firmly in place, black people were ready for a theme song that
s7ztions con- inspired and inflamed that newfound spirit of pride and freedom."
areas Within two months after its release, “Say It Loud” had sailed to
4 etl Bight the number one position on Billboard’s R&B charts and number ten
=< and when on the pop chart. Yet according to Brown: “That song scared people
== Bushing” too. Many white people didn’t understand it... They thought I was
som aie, varate’l saying kill the honky, and every time I did something else around
5 exaoumagedl the idea of black pride another top forty station quit playing my
__. records.” Even though Brown and Mayfield fell out of favor with
.zzs of KSOL : . . . .
= White radio programmers and their small White following because
of their “militant” message, they became heroes and role models in
: zidaline or African American communities.
iF thle song... By 1971, the Black Nationalist message and the ethos of the Black
a Power Movement had influenced the content and musical arrange-
ments that characterized the sound of soul. As observed by historian
Soul 277
__ ene i TT I,

--- Page 8 ---
Brian Ward, “...black performers, writers, arrangers, DJs and music busi- vision for inn:
ness entrepreneurs were all members of the larger black community and America” (1973
shared a general sense of intense frustration as the optimism of the ear- Light Years Awe
ly 1960s dwindled.”” The passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act and the The themes
Voting Rights Act in 1965 raised the expectations of African Americans Black Power Mc
regarding social, economic, and political change. Yet change came at soul singers, fe
a slow pace due to resistance of the broader society and the collapse relationships. ©
of an industrial economy.” Other soul singers joined Curtis Mayfield and, along with
and James Brown in campaigning for racial equality, social justice, and respectively). A.
community empowerment through their songs. The Isley Brothers Franklin, in “I ¢
expounded on the need for “Freedom” (1970) while the Chi-Lites de- mitted relation.
manded that the government “Give More Power to the People” (1971); faith in love, he
the O'Jays described betrayal in “Backstabbers” (1972) and expounded than failed relat
on the effects of racism and greed in “For the Love of Money” (1973).
Simultaneously, the Staple Singers in “You've Got to Earn It” (1971) THE SOUL ML.
and “Respect Yourself” (1971) encouraged self-sufficiency and pride The samnelatt ee
among African Americans. from th i
Soul singers also criticized the “empty” speeches of politicians, D sng ae
as James Brown did in “Talkin’ Loud and Saying Nothing” (1972). escribing the
. - . me . music scholar
He explained that it “was aimed at the politicians who were running seeking t .
their mouths but had no knowledge of what life was like for a lot of b § £0 COs
people in this country. It was also aimed at some cats on their soap- erween the ge
boxes...who were telling the people one thin while manipulating the subject. Tk
. : 5 peopre on 5 wm P = singer—the sin;
their emotions for personal gain.”” Similarly, Brown directed “Funky the th chmica™
President (People It’s Bad)” (1974) toward President Gerald Ford, cca decile’
who replaced President Richard Nixon when he resigned on August 9, |
1974, Brown recalls: “Every time he made a speech, it gave people the extension, SOSP
blues. He was anice man, but he talked alot and didn’t say anything.”” in. live performs
> anys Reverend Ceci:
Stevie Wonder, in “You Haven’t Done Nothin’”’(1974), also critiques
the empty promises of politicians. SESE OS 8
Stevie Wonder was one of several Motown artists who recorded wner a preaes
message songs that represented a shift in lyric content from the ear- with their ow:
lier teenage love songs that defined the company’s core repertoire. I feel the sam
Motown’s founder and president Berry Gordy explains: “As the new and touching
decade was beginning, the changes in society inspired changes in our the getting he
music.”2! The Supremes sang about the hardships of having children Aretha’s mi
in poverty in “Love Child” (1968), the Temptations reported on the style of Black pr
cause and impact of drug use in “Cloud Nine” (1968), and Marvin vocal inflectior
Gaye’s “What’s Going On” (1971) and “Inner City Blues” (1971) ings punctuate.
deplored the poverty that plagued inner-city communities, as did build the inter.
Stevie Wonder’s “Living for the City” (1973). Addressing broader so- si-song. Preach:
cial issues, Gladys Knight and the Pips promoted racial harmony in of live perform:
“Friendship Train” (1969), Edwin Starr condemned the Vietnam War Both Black
in “War” (1970), and the Temptations critiqued the status of society in vocal styles. T:
“Ball of Confusion (That’s What the World is Today)” (1970). Similar bre, texture, a-
to the songs of Curtis Mayfield, Stevie Wonder articulated. a spiritual Olly Wilson ¢
278 African American Music Soul

--- Page 9 ---
z vision for inner peace and racial harmony in “Jesus Children of
- America” (1973), “Higher Ground” (1973), and “Heaven Is 10 Zillion |
bs Light Years Away” (1974). |
: The themes of unity and respect advocated by the Civil Rights and |
: Black Power Movements also applied to personal relationships. Many
: soul singers, for example, offered advice for establishing rewarding
7 relationships. Otis Redding suggested “Try a Little Tenderness” (1966) |
: and, along with Aretha Franklin, demanded “Respect” (1965 and 1967, 4 |
: respectively). Al Green, in “Let’s Stay Together” (1971), and Aretha
-. Franklin, in “I Can’t See Myself Leaving You” (1969), encouraged com- |
. mitted relationships. In Michael Haralambos’s view, soul “expresses
faith in love, hope for love, and the joy and happiness in love,” rather ,
_ than failed relationships, a theme frequently found in the blues.?°
J THE SOUL MUSIC AESTHETIC
=i The sound of soul is characterized by a set of aesthetic features derived
from the musical and preaching traditions of the Black folk church.
- Describing the relationship between these traditions, the late gospel
- music scholar and performer Pearl Williams-Jones observed: “[I}n j
oe seeking to communicate the gospel message, there is little difference |
2 between the gospel singer and gospel preacher in the approach to
se the subject. The same techniques are used by the preacher and the
og singer—the singer perhaps being considered the lyrical extension of
7 the rhythmically rhetorical style of the preacher.””* Soul singers are
os best described as secular counterparts of gospel preachers, and, by
_ extension, gospel singers. This singer-preacher linkage is illustrated q
aes in live performances of Aretha Franklin, as described by her brother
, Reverend Cecil Franklin:
_ You listen to her and it’s like being in church. She does with her voice exactly
what a preacher does with his when he moans to a congregation. That moan ‘
- = strikes a responsive chord in the congregation and somebody answers back 3
UL Ss with their own moan, which means I know what you're moaning about because
“2 I feel the same way. So you have something sort of like a thread spinning our Timbre / i
7 and touching and tieing [sic] everybody together in a shared experience just like The quality i
—_ the getting happy and shouting together in church.” afveeal oF !
non Aretha’s musical delivery also reflects the dramatic performance instrumental |
oe style of Black preachers, who employ a range of improvisatory devices— Sound; for
os vocal inflections, varying timbres, word repetition, and phrase end- example, #
an ings punctuated by “grunts,” “shouts,” and moans, etc.—to gradually canines ~“ i
- 2 build the intensity to a level that transforms the sermon into qua- than a piano: me 4
ate si-song. Preaching is, in this regard, similar in sound to the aesthetic ‘Texuive
toe of live performances of gospel and soul music. Theinteractide 7
ae Both Black gospel music and the soul sound encompass many among the vocal
mon vocal styles. They result from the personalized treatment of tim- and instrumental '
- ose bre, texture, and shading by singers** to achieve what composer lines in an q
mil Olly Wilson describes as the “heterogeneous sound ideal”—an ensemble. ,
Soul 279 F
—_ _ ere EN
; rr
4
i s
ae
i. 7

--- Page 10 ---
| a
African-derived sound aesthetic that is in opposition to the “homo-
geneous sound ideal” associated with Western-European derived
cultures2® The heterogeneous sound ideal is based on the principle
that “there exists a common approach to [black] music making in
which a kaleidoscopic range of dramatically contrasting qualities of
sound (timbre) is sought after in both vocal and instrumental mu-
sic. The fundamental musical sound texture is one that contains a
combination of diverse timbres.” This concept of contrasting colors
is distinguished from the preference for the similarity of colors or
; homogeneous sound ideal.*°
Soul singers achieve the heterogeneous sound ideal by alternat-
ing lyrical, percussive, and raspy timbres; alternating straight with
vibrato tones; weaving moans, shouts, grunts, hollers, and screams
into the melody; and juxtaposing umique vocal and instrumental
textures. They also vary the pitch by contrasting voices of different
ranges; shifting from high to low pitches; and incorporating “bends,”
“slides,” melismas, and passing tones in the melody.*! The heteroge-
neous sound ideal is also produced by Black instrumentalists, who
imitate vocal sounds by altering traditional embouchures, playing
techniques, fingerings, and by adding devices to distort the tradition-
al sounds of instruments.
Vocalists and instrumentalists combine the above improvisatory
; techniques with various rhythmic devices to build the intensity of songs.
They extend the length of notes at climatic points by repeating words, .
phrases, or entire sections of songs, and by adding vocal or instrumental -
Cadenza cadenzas. Central to the improvisatory performance aesthetic of soul mE #3
An extended, performers is the use of call-response structures, which facilitates =
sometimes musical exchanges between vocalists, instrumentalists, vocalists and -
impr ovised snstrumentalists, and performers and audience. These exchanges allow ~
Sener i avocal performers to display their creative abilities and technical skills and -
or instrumental facilitate audience participation in the performance. When performers ,
pier eee cteate and interpret songs within the aesthetic boundaries defined by
usually occurring ;
athe end. Black people, the responses of audiences can become so audible that :
they momentarily drown out the performer. The verbal responses of ~ Bie
audiences ate accompanied by hand clapping; foot stomping; head, ee
shoulder, hand, and arm movement, and spontaneous dance as illus- “ .
trated at performances of Aretha Franklin (Figure 10.2). Reviewing her i
concerts, music critic Charles Sanders wrote: oo
At every show I wondered what it was—that very special thing she was always a
able to get going with an audience. Sometimes there were 16,000 people in a ceoet
; sports arena and Aretha would be working on stage, doing Dr. Feelgood {sic| and oo
then Spirit in the Dark [sic], and it seemed that all 16,000 people would become pore
involved in a kind of spiritual thing with her, sort of like what must have 2 .ae
happened on the Day of Pentecost, and those people—all kinds; dudes, sisters io
in Aftos and those in blonde wigs, even church-looking people—would start oe
moving with the music, and as Aretha took them higher and higher some of oo
them would scream and jump up on their seats, even men like 50 and 60 years a
old would run down to the stage and try to touch her.** am
280 African American Music oS,
“f ee ae =

--- Page 11 ---
ee

\

-_ i
occ oae ai) a) Ten Figure 10.2 |

Aretha Franklin
iu
‘av ry DIFF ia) Oa A DAY ea on an early 1960s
(Cuando Vuelva A Tu Lado) sheet music cover,

eee Music and Sparist area ar when she was still :

STANLEY ADAMS MARIA GREVER singing jazz-pop
a material. Courtesy :
ie ‘ David A. Jasen. |
F : i
Saat 2 i 4

; |

, |

i

; 5 I

om |

‘ es. Bi ith wn 4 |

a —_

i ARETHA FRANKLIN }

e SER mcrae rately SRC aaa ee) !

. . . > . j |
Similar to the audience’s fesponse to Aretha, audiences also

engage in continuous verbal exchanges with performers. Sam Moore :

of the soul duo Sam and Dave explains:

When we performed, we had church. On Sundays the minister would preach {

and the people in the pews would holler back to him. This is what we started j |

doing. I arranged the parts between Dave and me so that one of us became the j

preacher and would say “Come on Dave” or “Come on Sam.” The audience q

would automatically shout “Come on Sam” or “Sing Dave” or “Yes Sir.” That ] !

was our style.**

In communicating with their audiences, Black performers also 5
display an intensity of emotion and total physical involvement ;
through use of the entire body. Sam Moore recalled: “We [Sam and
Dave] would lose at least four and five pounds a night in sweat” from |
dancing and moving around so much. This kinetic activity extended
to the accompanying musicians, who danced in synchronized steps
while playing instruments.>* This “unification of song and dance,”
as ethnomusicologist Mellonee Burnim described it in reference to

gospel music,* is central to the aesthetic of soul and the broader rm
Black popular tradition, Audience participation is important to per-
formers—it encourages them to explore the full range of aesthetic
possibilities, which increases the intensity of the performance, there-
by generating continuous verbal and nonverbal feedback from the me
. . soe . . . “ a = Wd
audience. This form of participation is the most important criterion i
| hi
Soul 281 . |
aa |
a F
4 ee
zi. ms
i a
BT Ae
a = tt si

--- Page 12 ---
_
: by which soul singers determine whether they Se =e 3 12 e,neSs eee
| thetic expectations of the audience. gecocce =
| Live recordings capture the essence of the aesthetic of soul. which eee -
: ss illustrated on James Brown Live at the Apollo (1962), James Brown rors 5 a :
| Live at the Apollo (1967), and Aretha Live at Fillmore West (1971). The tee ——
! soul aesthetic, however, is mitigated on studio recordings because ang eeuls -
: of technical limitations of recording equipment of this period and shes i
: the use of traditional production concepts. Aware of these and oth- aN erck
er restrictions, Brown acknowledged that he “agreed to make his afer of
rhythms on the [studio] records a lot simpler” while “scill going for gu pie nS “
that live-in-the-studio sound...” Similarly, 2 comparison of live and meee eS 2
studio performances of Ray Charles and Aretha Franklin, among prego IT
other soul performers, reveal major differences in the aesthetic. In live age 2 ie a
performances, the tempos are faster, rhythmic structures are more & gocge ee
complex, word and pitch repetition are extensive, brassy horns are Se
central to the musical arrangement, vamps are extended, the over sree Fees
all level of intensity is greater, and the music is continuous without ‘Ege Es
breaks between most songs: oie S5
THE DECLINE OF THE SOUL ERA ne tEee
With few exceptions, between the mid-and late 1970s record companies few Sv een
began to limit or discontinue their production of soul music. Hance &e
Contributing factors were the domination of the conglomerates ciS sae:
in the production, marketing, and distribution of Black music; the at Bs
expansion of the crossover market for Black music; and the popularity 80 PODs
Disco of disco among the masses. These developments paralleled the . a =
Category of decline of a Black Nationalist impulse among segments of the African San 0255
1970s dance American community, the cynicism chat prevailed among many aa m -
music, derived African Americans regarding the slow progress roward racial justice, we Fra
from the and changes in the economic conditions of society that adversely aa E-
abbreviation of impacted onacore group of African Americans. PIT Tate
discotheque, the : ° ; ; ; ssn il
vnain venue of Despite the local and national calls for social and economic pee
consumption. equality 1n the early Loris, the Black poor and working class moved —
further onto the margins of society. The first recession (1973-1975), i ae
the government's policy of fiscal conservatism, and society’s retreat sae
from the 1960s equal rights legislation contributed to an evolv- TRE
ing social and economic mayhem. Even though the growing Black "orate
middle class fared better economically than the poor and working wos 3
class Blacks, they often did so in an unwelcoming environment that om :
impacted on the view of social change. 38 The changing economy and vom ge
broader social conditions influenced new strategies in the music mS
| industry regarding the production and marketing of Black music. pe te
An unpublished document, “A Study of the Soul Music = soni
Environment Prepared for Columbia Records Group,” submitted ae
to CBS in May 1972, provided the impetus for change. Known as “saree
the “Harvard Report,” this document analyzed the development of nomeed
282 African American Music .
Ty

--- Page 13 ---
record labels that dominated the Black music market and outlined
a strategy for CBS to expand into this market. Implementing some
recommendations while ignoring others, CBS (and other major re-
cord companies that followed this model) formed partnerships with
independent labels specializing in Black music. CBS also purchased
the catalogues of independent labels and signed their most estab- |
lished artists to its roster. The partnership arrangement provided |
new capital and a broader marketing and distribution network for
African American songwriter-producers and their artists. It also |
enabled Black independent labels to negotiate contracts in ways that |
preserved their autonomy—artistic control and the freedom to sign |
artists to their roster—as illustrated in the arrangement between CBS |
and Philadelphia International Records (PIR; see John A. Jackson’s | |
discussion in Chapter 16).
In 1971, the same year that Harvard University Business School )
conducted research for the report, songwriter-producers Kenny j |
Gamble and Leon Huff founded PIR and entered into partnership : |
with CBS. PIR functioned as a custom or associated label for CBS.
As such, Gamble and Huff signed, developed, and produced artists
for CBS who, in turn, manufactured, marketed, and distributed their )
recordings. PIR also supervised the administration of its own pub- | |
lishing company, Mighty Three Music. After partnering with PIR, 4
CBS subsequently made similar arrangements with Motown’s for- 4
mer songwriters Brian and Eddie Holland (Invictus Records) and The j |
Isley Brothers (T-Neck Records), among others.*? |
Four years prior to Gamble and Huff’s affiliation with CBS, the duo j
had founded and recorded artists on their own Neptune label, distrib- {
uted by Chess Records. These recordings established new standards for
the production of Black popular music. Nelson George observed that, |
with a guarantee of financial stability and access to a major distribution
company, Gamble and Huff “went on a creative rampage,” producing a
string of hits throughout the 1970s." PIR described these recordings as j
message songs, which were delivered over PIR’s signature soul-funk- and
soul-funk-disco-hybrid grooves accentuated by a unique blending of i |
strings and horns. The O'Jays’ “Survival” (1975), “Give the People What j
They Want (1975), “Unity” (1975), “Family Reunion” (1975), “Message |
in Our Music” (1976); Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes’ “Bad Luck” | |
(197S) and Wake Up Everybody (1975); and McFadden & Whitehead’s
“Ain’t No Stopping Us Now” (1979) are examples of PIR’s brand of { :
soul produced during the mid- to late 1970s.

In contrast to the creative control exercised by Gamble and Huff { ‘
during their affiliation with CBS, the established soul artists signed i.
directly to major labels enjoyed less, if any, creative freedom. They |
were lured from independent labels by offers of higher advances,
recording budgets, and fees payable to artists. These expensive con- "
tracts, however, became a liability for many soul singers. Expecting {
Soul 283 ; OM

i ii
—_— |
if
q
‘ P
a

--- Page 14 ---
to recover these expenses and realize a large profit, record labels pres- much the rac
sured these artists to target White consumers by transforming their in the corne:
soul aesthetic into a crossover sound. Journalist and culture critic value and sta
Nelson George has labeled this process as the “Death of Rhythm and Cuerts \
Blues.” Under the control of conglomerates, many well-established with disco e&.
Black artists, including the proclaimed “Godfather of Soul,” James Have (1976...
Brown, became temporarily disempowered creatively. and Heartbe.:
Recording for the small, independent King Records from 1958 Sigler, and R

to 1971, Brown enjoyed considerable creative freedom. This arrange- ductions dic
ment eventually changed after he signed with Polydor in 1971, three recordings,
years after Linn Broadcasting bought King Records as a subsidiary “evar a
label. Brown explains: all my life th:
In the early years [beginning in 1971] with them I was hitting the singles in Deing Curtis.
spite of the company. The songs were hits because I forced them through the By the e-
company and made them hits myself. Iwas supposed to have creative control, disappeared :

but they started remixing my records. I mixed them, but when they came out

they didn’t sound like what ’'d mixed. The company didn’t want che funk in Saayres Mores’
there too heavy. They’d take the feeling out of the record. They didn’t want tne conglom:

James Brown to be raw. Eventually they destroyed my sound [around 1979}... —usic, Paro
In destroying my sound, Polydor cost me my audience. ==d the nose
They tried to take me over into disco by bringing in an outside producer, Brad or soul a
Shapiro. I was against it from the first. Disco had no groove, it had no sophisti- scnaled the :
cation, it had nothing. I fought against doing it but finally gave in. They called we snesd cbs -
the album The Original Disco Man (1979). le wasn’t disco all the way, but I was . “aes es =
unhappy with the result.” peepee es
inc t9905 =-

In other words, James Brown was forced to relinquish artistic eee
control over his productions and modify his soul and funk aesthet- oe ‘ieee

ic to generate crossover sales. This strategy proved unsuccessful, as imal gs
evidenced by Brown’s failure to make the pop charts after 1975 and ee tng ace.
low placements on the rhythm and blues charts beginning in 1978. ~—
Following the disappointing sales of The Original Disco Man, Brown Sette a
and Polydor parted ways in 1980. With few exceptions, the crossover ; —
production aesthetic applied to established soul singers did not genet- * oem i He ole

ate the anticipated results. Therefore, Polydor, CBS, Warner Brothers, mt otal od & ==
and RCA, among others, chose not to renew the contracts of such wen ee Be <
artists as James Brown, Johnny Taylor, Bobby Womack, Tyrone Davis, (2.5 ERS Tt
Wilson Pickett, and Diana Ross. tate Biscay oes
Similarly, soul artists signed to independent labels experi- Letanneel
mented with the disco formula. Lamont Dozier, of Motown’s re
Holland-Dozier-Holland songwriter-producer team, produced oi Trea? &
Aretha Franklin’s Sweet Passion (1977) for Atlantic Records. This ne ER poh
production did not meet the sale expectations of Atlantic. Her 6a: Sees
subsequent experimentations with disco under the direction of = Foe
producer-performers Nile Rodgers and Bernard Edwards did not amet So cl oe
meet her own expectations. Reflecting on this period, Aretha re- 8 OEE oe
called: “I realized that my voice would have worked with disco tracks. oS Be =

But I was determined not to be labeled a disco artist. No matter how sm ht Fed

284 African American Music
rs
i.

--- Page 15 ---
|
much the radio stations were shoving rhythm and blues [soul] back
in the corner, I still believed and I believe today in the permanent
value and staying power of soul music.””
Curtis Mayfield articulated a similar view after experimenting
with disco elements between 1976 and 1979 on Give, Get, Take and
Have (1976), Never Say You Can’t Survive (1977), Do It All Night (1978),
and Heartbeat (1979), the latter produced by Norman Harris, Bunny
Sigler, and Ronald Tyson of Philadelphia International. These pro-
ductions did not meet the success levels of Mayfield’s earlier soul ’
recordings, which led him to conclude: “Other people’s styles could
never express me the way I expressed myself. J learned from that that
all my life the music only sold when I was being me, when I was just
being Curtis.” |
By the end of the 1970s, most of the 1960s soul performers had 3
disappeared from the Top 40 charts and the popular musical sound- ; |
scape. Moreover, the productions of the custom labels distributed by
the conglomerates had begun to reflect new trends in Black popular |
music. Party themes replaced the social and political commentary,
and the gospel elements that defined the unique character and spirit |
of soul eventually became less dominant. These fundamental changes 5
signaled the end of the soul era. Nevertheless, the soul aesthetic per-
meated the disco-soul sound of Sylvester and inspired the mellow q
gospel-flavored ballads of the post-disco era represented in the 1980s 4
and 1990s soul-derived recordings marketed under the label R&B. |
Representative artists of the latter include Luther Vandross, Lionel j
Richie, Maze featuring Frankie Beverly, Freddie Jackson, Keith Sweat, q :
and R. Kelly. In the 1990s, a new generation of performers borrowed '
from the legacy of soul to create a derivative form known as neo-soul. ]
: i
NEO-SOUL: THE 1990s _
Neo-soul represents a reformulation and contemporary recontextu- — Neo-soul j |
alization of the soul aesthetic. It combines elements of soul music 1990s |
and the spoken word of 1960s Black poets with those of funk, jazz, revival and ] :
R&B, and hip-hop. During the first decade of the genre’s evolution,  " econtextuali- q |
neo-soul artists prioritized and arranged these elements in ways 7400" of 1960s ‘ |
that defined the music’s distinctive character and stylistic diversity. soubempe. q
Me’Shell NdegéOcello’s Plantation Lullabies (1993) was one of the first
recordings to provide a prototype for this genre. This CD is anchored
in the spoken word tradition delivered over soul, funk, hip-hop, and :
jazz-derived tracks. The tempos range from slow to fast. { |
The emergence of neo-soul parallels the rise of hip-hop and ‘ ‘
R&B as the two most popular forms of contemporary Black musi- |
cal expression. Beginning in the late 1980s, Afrocentric or Black i
Nationalist and “gangsta” rap dominated the production of Black ] ,
popular music. By the mid-1990s, however, neo-soul emerged as an ; i
alternative to hip-hop and R&B. Many of the genre’s innovators and. "
a
Soul 285 j
- ™
ot eee

--- Page 16 ---
popularizers were born in the 1970s to parents of the soul era. Their excerpts of 1:
exposure to a broad range of Black musical expression and the Black 1999). For exa
Nationalist leanings of the era provided inspiration for the world- and the Pips.
views and creative output of these artists. lyrics and me:
Similar to hip-hop, neo-soul artists began their careers writing Wind 8 Fire's
and reading poetry. As professional musicians, they wrote or cowrote use of sample:
and produced or coproduced many of their own songs, arranged seal. Ciiticie!-
and performed background vocals, and played acoustic and electric Sratie enter:
instruments (vs. synthesized and programmed electronic instru- watering tox:
mentation) on their recordings. From the mid- to late 1990s these eecists Farthe:
artists contributed to the continuing evolution of the genre. They musicians ple:
established the African American spoken word in combination with —— ee
jazz and the flavorings of soul as the core aesthetic. Characterized by a Ham-
slow and moderate tempos, this aesthetic is a subdued cross between an pegetdimes
speech and song, a rhythmic flow described as “lagging behind the = 097s and. ye
beat”—a signature of Billie Holiday and an approach emulated by Nao-sur’..
Dinah Washington and many jazz singers. The speech-derived aes- acrime teria
thetic gives preference to a narrow pitch range and a syllabic-styled wine herles Boe
(one pitch per syllable) interpretation that juxtaposes percussive and D'Angelo’s =
melodic qualities. This approach is in contrast to the melismatic Thetes Cit"
interpretation (several notes per syllable) characteristic of soul music. Coogee” Ags
Erykah Badu’s Baduzim (1997) and Mama’s Gun (1997) illustrate the din who hes
crystallization of a distinctive spoken word-jazz hybrid neo-soul style wa peceee Tete
that exploits a range of Black aesthetic qualities and improvisatory ee ee:
devices unique to jazz, including scat singing. Badu’s style provided eee in “rt
the model for neo-soul singers of the twenty-first century, including #4 ae Gels.
Jill Scott (Who Is Jill Scott?: Words and Sounds Vol. 1, 2000). sg cleas waleas
Many neo-soul artists preserved the 1960s and 1970s spirit of soul Bee REESE
using various approaches. D’Angelo’s (Brown Sugar, 1995) smooth, ag, peg “
mellow, and sultry vocals demonstrate an affinity to soul sing- w= comp gg, [an
ets Smokey Robinson, Curtis Mayfield, and Al Green, whose styles foyeemer tee
inspired those of other male neo-soul singers such as Maxwell. In _2 8 Chae ep =
contrast to D’Angelo’s speech-song delivery style, Maxwell (Maxwell’s ee
Urban Hang Suite, 1996) illustrates a more melodic approach, similar “ads Glan -c: :
to that of Smokey Robinson, with a funk-oriented groove. Similarly, r _ epee” .
Groove Theory, on their self-titled CD (1995), preserves the sensibil- wy Pinkae Fim
ity of 1970s soul reminiscent of The Emotions. Eric Benét (A Day in = * 1m, og
the Life, 1999), on the other hand, presents an eclectic mix of songs , fe ee -
that combine the soul-oriented vocals of Maxwell and the jazz-spo- - 2 wes a8 -
ken word approach of Erykah Badu. smu . _ .
Moving closer to the roots of soul, some neo-soul artists tapped _— _. - _.!
directly into the gospel tradition (D’Angelo’s “Higher,” 1995; and . pe oe
Eric Benét’s “Love the Hurt Away,” 1999); others covered original < ad Z.
recordings of soul (D’Angelo’s “Crusin,” 1995, originally record- . - oe a
ed by Smokey Robinson; and Angie Stone’s “Trouble Man,” 1999, . ceeueetge,
originally recorded by Marvin Gaye). They also sampled significant at Le -
286 African American Music
=— rr

--- Page 17 ---
a
excerpts of 1970s soul recordings (Angie Stone’s Black Diamond, |
1999). For example, “Neither One of Us,” recorded by Gladys Knight
and the Pips, provides the instrumental track for Stone’s original |
lyrics and melodies on “No More Rain (In This Cloud)”; and Earth, |
Wind & Fire’s “Sun Goddess” does the same for “Visions.” Stone’s
use of samples is intended to preserve the organic character of 1970s
soul. Criticizing the recordings of what she calls “commercial soul,”
Stone contends that her representation of the genre is “not about |
: watering down but using the roots of gospel and R&B.”* Neo-soul
artists further retained the spirit and character of soul by using studio
musicians playing instruments representative of the soul era—drums, 1
percussion, acoustic piano and guitar, Fender Rhodes and Wurlitzer |
pianos, Hammond B-3 organ, trumpet, trombone, and saxophone—
| on recordings (D’Angelo’s “Higher,” 1995; Erykah Badu’s “Booty,”
1997; and Jill Scott’s “It’s Love,” 2000).
Neo-soul artists chose to embrace the 1960s ideology of a Black |
- consciousness in various ways. The titles of CDs and songs, as well as
. the lyrics, for example, are derived from ethnic and cultural sources
, (D’Angelo’s Brown Sugar, Angie Stone’s Black Diamond, Eric Benét’s
: “Ghetto Girl,” and Me’Shell NdegéOcello’s “Dred Loc”). In “Brown
, Sugar,” D’Angelo identifies his partner as Brown Sugar with caramel
: skin who has a big sister named Chocolate Thai. Maxwell describes |
- his love interest as a “honeydosugachocolate dumpling” in “Sumthin’
: Sumthin” (1996) and voices his preference for a lady with brown
= legs in “Suitelady (The Proposal Jam)” (1996). Jill Scott describes her |
= man as being of a deep brown complexion in “Love Rain” (2000) and
makes reference to soul food (black-eyes peas, collard greens, and
: Sweet potatoes) in “It’s Love” (2000).
: The lyrics in 1990s neo-soul focus primarily on personal rela-
i tionships. Unlike the demeaning and misogynistic representation
ns of women that became commonplace in hip-hop, neo-soul acknowl- ]
q edges the vulnerabilities and fears of both men and women in pursuit :
: of rewarding and committed relationships (D’Angelo’s “Lady” and '
2° ; “Alright,” 1995; Eric Benét’s “Spend My Life with You” and “Love the 1 |
L Hurt Away,” 1999; Maxwell’s “Sumthin’ Sumthin?” and “Lonely’s
: i the Only Company,” 1996; Groove Theory’s “Come Home” and j
j “Tell Me,” 1995; and Erykah Badu’s “Otherside of the Game” and j
= | “Bag Lady,” 2000). Angie Stone describes the narratives of women |
s ‘ as being about “all the ups and downs, the trials and tribulations | |
' and the joys.”** Women speak about these issues, as well as the social q |
ES 4 and political concerns of African Americans, with empowered and | r
2 } liberated voices. Me’Shell NdegéOcello’s Plantation Lullabies (1993) {
Se ' references the 1960s struggle for racial equality in “’m Diggin’ You
pe j Like an Old Soul Record).” She also addresses the negative effects :
: i of a capitalistic system on urban Black America in “Shoor’n Up and i
nt i Gett’n High,” and issues of Blackness and White standards of beauty i
a 4
i q
i
: Soul 287 § :
ee ne

--- Page 18 ---
in “Soul on Ice.” Through their lyrics and musical features, neo-soul Fellow :
artists sought to preserve the African American musical legacy of ear- Stanicr:
lier periods in contemporary expressions. nary par
Andrew
CONCLUSIONS Indiare
Soul music is an expression of a cultural identity and racial con- Takers.
sciousness that reflects the preservation of values rooted in an African — Pow
cultural legacy. According to DJ Jeffrey Troy, soul music “...maintains : ial
a hell of a lot of importance because it is one of the very few things net
in this country that the black man can say is his. It’s a part of his ATES
identification and very important for image making purposes.”4” a
Emerging as a distinctive genre during the 1960s era of social unrest aan
and the call for Black Power, soul music became the major vehicle for Seems |
the promotion of a Black Nationalist agenda. Soul singers ascended PRESSE as
as community icons, promoting concepts of Black solidarity, Black che
pride, and Black empowerment. Radio stations initially banned these ne
recordings because of their overtly political messages. Nevertheless, Sis Fz
soul became the most popular and influential form of Black musical 833028
expression in post-World War II America. Da.resc
Soul is readily identified by its gospel roots. These roots blurred <a MTEL
the perceived sacred-secular musical boundaries, providing a famil- — 83
iar sound that crossed all social classes and generations. The popular- _ ata esa
ity of soul among the African American masses did not go unnoticed anime
by the conglomerates that expanded into and began dominating this BIBS,
market in the 1970s. The involvement of major record labels in the > Le
production, marketing, and distribution of Black music occurred Erm. Bag
when disco emerged as a crossover formula. The popularity of disco = tec
among the masses influenced changes in the production of many —s
soul singers. In some contexts, the aesthetic of soul gave way to cross- ow.
over formulas that deemphasized the core elements of a soul sound. — FF
In other settings, Black music productions blended disco elements “nmes Br:
with those of soul in ways that preserved and highlighted compo- rien ee
nents of the soul aesthetic. SSE valk E)
By the end of the 1970s, the 1960s sound of soul largely had arech2 =-
disappeared from the popular musical soundscape. The spirit, char- joe, =
acter, and/or elements of soul, nevertheless, provided the foundation Terris 3:
for the 1980s and 1990s forms of Black musical expression. Marketed fe She
under the labels “R&B” and “neo-soul,” these genres illustrate how ero Ss:
contemporary African American musical expressions represent a tes See
blending and reworking of past traditions. They also exemplify how :
the concept of soul remains relevant in the production of Black a= EST oS
| culture in the post-soul era. ~ me,
| ACKNOWLEDGMENTS -.
: The research for this essay was conducted with the support of various 3 ae
: institutions and foundations. During my 1999-2000 residency as a aoa
288 African American Music “i
] an = |
= aaee ae oe

--- Page 19 ---
Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences,
Stanford, CA, I completed the final stages of research for a prelimi-
nary paper on this topic. Iam grateful for the financial support by the
Andrew W. Mellon Foundation and the College of Arts and Sciences,
Indiana University-Bloomington. This essay draws and revises some |
material from other essays by the author: “Soul Music: Its Sociological
and Political Significance in American Popular Culture,” Journal of | |
Popular Culture 17:2 (Fall 1983); “Africanisms in African-American : |
Music,” in Africanisms in American Culture, ed. Joseph E. Holloway |
(Indiana University Press, 1990), 185-209; and “The Influence of
Gospel Music on the Secular Music Industry,” in We'll Understand {
It Better By and By: African American Pioneering Gospel Composers, ed.
Bernice Johnson Reagon (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution 1
Press, 1992), 19-33. f |
KEY TERMS |
Black Power Movement
Cadenza 1
Call-response | |
Common meter
Disco
Jim Crow laws
Melisma J |
Neo-soul |
Polyrhythm
Soul music |
Texture :
Timbre
KEY NAMES a
|
James Brown
. Ray Charles
Sam Cooke
: Aretha Franklin . 7
: Martin Luther King Jr. |
Curtis Mayfield a
; Me’Shell NdegéOcello
Angie Stone |
‘ The Staple Singers | |
: i
QUESTIONS :
1. Define soul music as both a cultural concept and a musical
genre. How is soul music related to the Civil Rights and Black | |
- Power Movements? .
5 2. Identify the musical elements and performance practices
: common to both soul and gospel music.
Soul 289 |
7 —!
a _ Fr
