--- Page 1 ---
|
CHAPTER 2
Secular Folk Music
Dena J. Epstein with contributions from i |
Rosita M. Sands a
|
—
—
Acloud of myth has surrounded African American secular folk music: 1
Blacks arrived in the New World culturally naked; African instru- 4
ments could not have been transported to the New World, because
the slaves could not bring anything with them; the slaves had no sec-
ular music; the banjo was invented by White musician Joel Walker 4
Sweeney in the 1830s. q
For many years, these myths were widely accepted and retold in d
the most respected reference books, ignoring the flourishing secular 4 !
music among African Americans. The myth that the slaves had no 4 |
secular music derived in part from the eighteenth-century evangelical a
belief that all secular music and dancing were sinful. Even the instru- 4 |
ments associated with dancing, such as the banjo and fiddle, came to 4 |
be considered disreputable. Then, when abolitionists began their pro- aq i:
test against slavery, they stressed the sufferings of the slaves, in strik- 4 |
ing contrast to the picture of the happy, carefree slave presented by q I
the minstrel theater. Frederick Douglass wrote in his autobiography: q
“T have been utterly astonished, since I came to the North, to find q /
persons who could speak of the singing among slaves, as evidence q :
of their contentment and happiness. It is impossible to conceive of a 4 |
greater mistake. Slaves sing most when they are most unhappy. The 4 |
songs of the slave represent the sorrows of his heart.”! q |
Slaves certainly were unhappy, but they had their moments of 7
fleeting pleasure. Contemporary documents establish beyond question 4 |
the continuous presence of secular music and dancing among African 4 |
Americans from their introduction to mainland North America to the
q
— |

--- Page 2 ---
rr =
, east
present, secular music that embodied distinguishing characteristics ns
of African music. They also identified features that establish African “at Fe
American music as a part of an African cultural continuum. oom
AFRICAN MUSICAL LEGACY :
Among the peoples of Africa, music was integrated into daily life, asa - oe
group activity, rather than as a performance before a passive audience. oT
Music accompanied all kinds of group work, regulating the pace of TO
work and lessening the monotony. Even individuals working alone 0
often sang about their work. Festivities were accompanied by music SO
and dancing. Derisive singing, even in reference to the king, was -- -
accepted as a means of expressing sentiments that were unacceptable oO
as speech. All these aspects of African culture were easily adapted to a
life in the New World. port
Characteristic elements of African music have been described - :
by J. H. Kwabena Nketia as multipart rhythmic structures, repeti- o
Call-response tive choruses with a lead singer, the call-response style of alternating cope
A song phrases juxtaposed or overlapping, and scales of four to seven steps, oa a ®
form which elements that reappeared in modified form in Aftican American mu- on
characterized sic.’ The short, repeated phrases that accompanied vigorous dancing See
inant upset Europeans accustomed to sedate dances and regular rhythmic Ps >
thse eesrltasy patterns. To them, African polyrhythms sounded like “noise”; many a
documented . . _. .
| spirituals, Also, Europeans could not acknowledge a music that did not conform to e
a performance their rules and scales. . Se
practice in Before the invention of sound recording, the only means of pre- Ae =
which a singer or  Sefving music was a notational system devised for European music. ~
instrumentalist Musicologists and folklorists who tried to notate African or African “<8
makes a musical American music had to omit or modify its distinctive characteristics: Tn
statement which blue notes, rhythmic complexities, overlapping of leader and chorus, at
is answered by melodic embellishments, and timbre. At best, these notated versions me Gay 2
another soloist, approximate the music; at worst, they distort it. Nevertheless, con- "See
instrumentalist, temporary descriptions of African American music are meaningful. DERI
orgroup. The They document its existence, describe its salient features as viewed eT
Ere firsthand, and provide the basis for a continuing history. bg Ge
ane sees N ot all Europeans were repelled by African music. Richard Jobson, © Shiels
overlap. a British trader who visited Africa in 1620-21, soon after the first Ioiallads
Also. called Africans were brought to Virginia, wrote: “There is without doubt, no ae
antiphony; call- people on the earth more naturally affected to the sound of musicke sa alr
and-response. [sic] than these people...singing...extempore upon any occasion.”* He Te
Polyrhythm also described drums and an instrument made from a gourd with a (PF Les
More than neck fastened to it and up to six strings. Surely, this was a prototype sine Sbes
one rhythmic of the banjo. Later travelers reported similar instruments that were to mee
pattern played be transported to the New World, sometimes by slaving captains who Pitz al.
simultaneously. tried to preserve the health of their cargos by compelling the captives oa
to dance aboard ship. In the New World, the Africans constructed “Fess
36 African American Music sig 2 8
enn eerreee eee

--- Page 3 ---
familiar instruments from local materials. The British Museum has |
had since 1753 an African-style drum made in Virginia from native I
wood with a deerskin head, materials not available in Africa, although | |
the drum is described as “typical of the Ashanti of Ghana.”* :
Besides drums, other instruments frequently described as African |
included various kinds of rhythm instruments, a xylophone called
the balafo or balaphon, quills (a form of panpipes), horns, and the ' )
banjo. The banjo is found throughout the Caribbean and the North Banjo :
American mainland under various names: banza, banjah, bandore, Fretted stringed i
banjar, and others.° instrument of |
African origin, |
AFRICANS IN NORTH AMERICA with four of five |
TOO SINS ON a Neck q
Although Africans arrived in Virginia in 1619, there arenot manyde- attached toa P|
scriptions of African musical activity in North America before 1800. drumlike body. 3 |
This ts partially due to the slow growth in the African American pop- % |
ulation during this period. In the seventeenth and eighteenth cen- q |
turies, the North American colonies were not nearly as profitable as i
those in the West Indies, where the population increased rapidly, and _
Africans were brought in vast numbers. As islands became overpopu- a
lated, planters and their workforces moved, sometimes to the main- ‘
land. In the West Indies, the music brought from Africa was able to i
survive and flourish for at least a century and a half, but on the main- 4 |
land, where the Black population was relatively smaller, the music Ei
became acculturated more rapidly. This was particularly true of the q |
English colonies. =
Dancing and Drumming in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries a
On the mainland in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the q |
dances of the Africans were usually confined to Sunday, their only day 3
of rest, but the English clergy was bitterly opposed to this desecration 4 l
of the Lord’s Day and did its best to stop the dancing (Figure 2.1). 4 ji
Dancing was allowed on those holidays that the planters permit- aa
ted. Traditionally, the Christmas holiday lasted until New Year’s, 1 ||
and some planters allowed a holiday at Easter. The religious nature i 1
of these holidays did not rule out secular music and dancing, which 4
became a central feature of the holiday celebrations.° 4
In 1739, the Reverend George Whitefield complained that the i :
Africans were permitted to “openly prophane [sic] the Lord’s Day dl i
with Dancing, Piping, and such like.” In the same year, an insurrec- a i
tion at Stono, South Carolina, was accompanied by singing, dancing, i
and beating drums, with the intention of attracting more Africans to : |
join the rebellion. As a consequence, the beating of drums was mam
forbidden. by law in South Carolina, as it had been earlier in the West 4
Indies. Yet despite this ban, which was rigorously enforced, drum- 4 |
ming continued unseen by the authorities. Former slaves in Georgia 4 '
a
Secular Folk Music 37 4 |
_
nn —— eo, — _ _. _ ~

--- Page 4 ---
—
Figure 2.1 = a The rate .
“Lynchburg Negro Pee Ee Coes ee be a
‘ ei oN . ce RAAT > RNOWT, 22 ris-.
Dance, August 18, % Canny mae ak, G Carey ee Nace = ous a . , - a
1853,” in Sketchbook of Does Lass Owe , evga, nee ar 1% es ‘ “‘UTOPeS novel
Landscapes i the State of pe BEAN Vin RC w Seas AA NSS os ARR. Qed WAGGA. 15 MUOAB TAR + : tion varies ---
Virginia by Lewis Miller. es ee holidavs rizr
Reproduced by , ES Ue? oe Ae
od vp ve f* ee with. the “Accs:
permission of po ea . Soe Ree 3 nf ay =n :
the Abby Aldrich / a & we At, fi ae and Massacn~
Rockefeller Folk Art } bia em a 5) Se feasting. an2 -
. : “ ’ : ae pO < EB “i i fF J : y - .
Museum, Colonial ee ( Cs og fe PF TA mid-eighteent
Williamsburg a hoo « ORS FE Ne | eee ce oe
Foundation, | A ee pS WS ( KS i a nee EES =
Williamsburg, Virginia. PPP NS ath NA ee , Election Dav :
Boo} \ AA ee BS ceremony. 272:
eX SO PSS ot BP A Sa -
y ey PON FSS UL RS eee In chess 2
Puchi ff ¢¢g | ' Ty GR "Rete os .
{ bie ah cf be AAS & little commun
(ys * fio) ; I i i 4 Pa 2 : chev c ce
ee Ne P Se Say! op he BE singing. Baz:
Tie a a ie pte gee ee oe: gaps cick? 2 ores ba
7 De eee ? Se pet sit eats cael ee oe bee | ‘ .
Geico cha eam ‘ EL We with sheepssx:
Dayrdibosg Det Resets Nag Vee 599 were caugh: »
more Africas
Althous>
who were interviewed in the 1930s by the Georgia Writers’ Project colonies bers:
described how to make drums from hollow trees and recalled dancing cmpact of Arr
to drums, which must have been done in secret. ofa WHEE. Mes
With drums so central to African music and dancing, substitutes ceeir Eurores
had to be found. One was a less-threatening but still rhythmic cardly surp>
instrument described by Thomas Jefferson as “the Banjar, which they cney could =-
brought hither from Africa.”® Other rhythmic support to dancing Yet evice:
was provided by hand clapping, foot stomping, and a practice zerformed “>
Patting juba apparently unique to the United States, “patting juba.” Patting juba -arity (“usus.
Rhythmic body was an extension of simple hand clapping, raising it to the level of a SeSCTIptlon ©
percussion self-contained accompaniment to dancing. Itwas described as striking sa close ec
used by slaves the hands on the knees, then striking the hands together, then striking sith count:
tee: BOGOR PE NY the right shoulder with one hand, the left with the other—all the Negroes, ~ -
date = while keeping time with the feet and singing. The earliest reference to 3 tormer Mioz
ancing. ' ; _ _—
s the practice dates from the 1820s, but by the 1830s serious attention among Biacx
was being paid to its rhythmic complexities. In 1880, the poet Sidney In Riche
Lanier described patting juba as a “quite complex succession of silliat perte:
rhythm, not hesitating to syncopate, fo change the rhythmic accent =ances. a coe
for the moment, or to indulge in other highly specialized variations “ig that wen.
of the current rhythmus.”” A variation of patting involved the use was emboc:
of two sticks to beat time on the floor, either alone or with other ijglete Da...
instruments. A Christmas celebration at Eutaw Plantation in South As late «:
Carolina during the Civil War had dancing accompanied by “two spout his +:
fiddlers, one man with bones, and another had sticks with which he sance ana
kept time on the floor.”"” =~ Eianeee
38 African American Music edn AS A

--- Page 5 ---
al
the rate at which this dancing became acculturated is not
snown. Initially ic must have been largely African, but gradually the
=uropean influence began to modify the steps. The rate of accultura-
=on varied from colony to colony. In the northern colonies, some
solidays originally observed by Whites gradually became associated |
‘vith the Africans. “‘Lection Day,” in Connecticut, Rhode Island,
and Massachusetts, involving the election of a king, processions, |
feasting, and dancing, became known as Negro Election Day by the |
mid-eighteenth century. In New York and N, ew Jersey, a holiday Origi- 4 |
nating with the Dutch, Pinkster, was a comparable holiday to Negro 4 :
Election Day. Both holidays were celebrated in open fields with much 3 |
ceremony, from the middle third of the eighteenth century.!! 1 |
In these colonies, slaves lived singly or in small groups and had |
little community life, Gradually, they created midyear festivals where q |
they could enjoy their distinctive culture: drumming, dancing, and 7 i
singing. Banjos, fiddles, and Guinea drums, made from logs covered ; fl
with sheepskin, provided the music for the Guinea dance. As slaves 4 |
were caught up in the performance, their behavior was reported as a
more African. ae
Although reports of African music and dancing in the southern dl !
colonies before 1800 were not common, still rarer were reports of the 3
impact of African culture upon European music and dancing. In an 4
era when many people were preoccupied with preserving elements of % |
their European heritage in an alien, often hostile, environment, it is q |
hardly surprising that they recorded very little of an influence that _
they could nor publicly acknowledge. a
Yet evidence has been found that these transplanted Europeans 4
performed “Negro dances,” not just occasionally but with some regu- aa
larity (“usual” was the term found in contemporary accounts). One q |
description of Virginia published in Dublin in 1776 stated: “Towards 4 i
the close of an evening, when the company are pretty well tired 4
with country dances, it is usual to dance jigs,...borrowed...from the a
Negroes.” Thomas Jefferson’s brother, Randolph, was described by q
a former Monticello slave as a “mighty simple man; used to come out 4
among Black people, play the fiddle and dance half the night.” q |
In Richmond before 1820, the courtly Black fiddler Simeon a
Gilliat performed at balls that began with a reel followed by contra q '
dances, a congo (demonstrably an African term), a hornpipe, and a 4 |
jig that would wind up the evening. This intermingling of cultures : !
was embodied by Gilliat himself, who, after a career of performing at . /
society balls, was painted playing the banjo for a group of children. a |
As late as 1876, Henry W. Ravenel of South Carolina reminisced 4 |
about his youth (he was born in 1814): “The jig was an African q
dance and a famous one in old times....For the jig the music would a !
be changed...The fiddle would assume a low monotonous tone, the 4 |
Bi :
a
j |
a
Secular Folk Music 39 j |
AARNE

--- Page 6 ---
whole tune running on three or four notes only...the stick-knocker a
changed his time, and beat a softer and slower measure.”'* ey
La Calinda ae
In Louisiana and the surrounding territory, areas that had been ga
settled by the Spanish and the French, developments were quite dif- a
ferent. Cultural and governmental ties were not to the other main- fe ee
land colonies but to Spanish America and to the French West Indies. ie
Louisiana had been settled almost 100 years after Virginia, with its —
African population coming directly from Africa between 1719 and b. Berge,
1731. With a relatively homogeneous population, the distinctive cbole af
character of New Orleans was established early. A Frenchman who eft,
had worked as a planter wrote in 1758 of the crowds of Africans who sf
La calinda danced the calinda, a dance widely reported in the French West Indies —_lO
African dance with its associated instrument, the banza. _
performed Lacalinda had been described in Martinique by a French mission- - a 2.
in the French ary, Jean Baptist Labat, as early as 1694. It was accompanied by two — ~
West indies and drums of unequal length, each with one open end, and one covered #
Loseiané i with skin. The drummers held them between their legs and played wy COR ~
ma cignee with four fingers of both hands. The larger drum provided the basic . - /
beat, and the smaller was played more quickly. Despite the good BT TEP
priest’s disapproval, all the Africans danced the calinda: the old, the i ey.
young, and even the children. It seemed as if they had danced it in the eee. é
wombs of their mothers. oS
In the mid-eighteenth century, Diderot’s Encyclopédie included ee
special entries for calinda and tamboula, the name of one of the drums.’* - "hl
The dance was always accompanied by a guitar-like instrument with 1 doled
four strings, called banza. Another Frenchman, Moreau de Saint-Méry, pias
writing in 1797, was as convinced of the African origin of the dance
and instruments as Labat had been."®
Thev were:
Other Popular Dances a stringec -
Although evangelical religion condemned secular music and dancing z sega
in the seaboard southern states, in New Orleans African-style danc- oo.
ing was permitted to flourish. Popular dances included the chica, the = ee
bamboula, the coonjine or counjaille, and the congo dance. Both the se purat
French and Spanish governments had permitted such dancing, and og
after the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, new “Ordinances of Police” _ a :
specified that the mayor should appoint places for slaves to dance oe ees
on Sundays. Travelers frequently described these dances at what is wees See
now called Congo Square, sometimes giving details of the steps and eee
accompanying instruments. a
In 1819, Benjamin Latrobe, the engineer who had supervised the ~ 2 Ersewe o
rebuilding of the Capitol after the War of 1812, described what he *, BY BBS 2
saw on a Sunday afternoon: = S56 1 ae,
40 African American Music aot, (4
a ea
Baie ar TC

--- Page 7 ---
a |
3 4 ZF ees :- 4 | q i
; i, ef Rt Apter tel FAMED Figure 2.2
fits se ierent POL: ELE ee A - Sketches of African i
Lo E j fh 2a ae d instruments from |
Ber oe Gaeta ee wf oe fer te BD fee fee € manuscript journal
— ego Se ~~ a a . of Benjamin Henry |
ee 8. eh ac eight : 3 é Z eee fe Latrobe. Entry from
Cpe oe . ae Ee ae Ov ime Lig are neal < 21 February 1819, i
ae o hi es Ct Ag? 2 gg New Orleans. i
oe eee ees cn opih Gee Sie isla 2. 25 he ae 4
pe ae SSL SG ee ee ROTeng Reproduced by
~ A i ; ae @ ¢- ‘¢ permission of the
. bee a © A SA = Bi pg S Papers of Benjamin i
L. ie soe a HH pa hr Pott | v Henry Latrobe, The
OL \ i : ZA ok tagey A Maryland Historical i
ey Bes. 1 P8 ee me ge Np Sg Society, Baltimore |
cg “Ww; : Ae SO A Ys :
“che es i iG VEZ) 4C A an tte Maryland. 4 |
ws ; i Po he ot 4
ee ee Eee ya PR Sabie lash ep ;
oe ey (i a hey 4 Ze a ff f Gong ee ; ae a |
pe es ” Ac Leumit. (Prontes, _
os: eh eee roe ——y, pt ae pS
ar Pree _ te ncn ee it y B74 q '
aA s ae ee Whieb 4 ro
ae ee PERE CE a pee > 4 |
per a a
eae ee i pres ‘ij ) eee ,
GF GOT re” : Ld 14 if é i
as, ane 1 aa} oe! ff a aaa fe a Hi
pe ta ot ie a # afi Leclolet 4 |
ee fe ae: a = E) a s
tetledied, = | we fats pearen hay a: ma
Were cea cetar et cid SHE eer gt pet foe é - a
pa Po ae i SE OF aly we a a
rt
They were formed in circular groups.... The music consisted of two drums and ql i
a stringed instrument....On the top of the finger board was the rude figure i"
of a man ina sitting posture—two pegs behind him to which the strings were f i,
fastened. The body was a calabash.... Bil
A man sang an uncouth song...which I suppose was in some African language, q |
for it was not French....The allowed amusements of Sunday have, it seems, a
perpetuated here those of Africa...” a |
‘a
Latrobe accompanied his account with sketches of the instru- gl ,
ments, among the very few contemporary drawings of African instru- el
ments that have survived from the mainland (Figure 2.2). aan
_
ial i,
ACCULTURATION OF AFRICANS IN THE NEW WORLD a
a aa |
oe ]
The gradual transformation of African culture to something that came a : |
to be called African American began almost as soon as the Africans *
landed in the New World. Speaking many different languages, they had a
to learn to communicate with each other and with their new masters. a
a |
Secular Folk Music 41 4 |

--- Page 8 ---
They had to adjust to new surroundings, new customs, new sounds, [sic] dancing is a dissi
smells, and tastes. They observed the music and dances of these patible with] rolintan
strange Europeans and gradually learned to combine them with the ro DeBoer Review inf
music and dance they had brought from Africa. The process by which supplied with cat-cut ,
this acculturation took place was described often in the West Indies [sic] every Secmna "a
but only once on the mainland. John Pierpont, a tutor from Litchfield, far as to provide ae
Connecticut, wrote from Georgetown District, South Carolina, of a Itwas also custome
Christmas celebration in 1805 when acculturated slaves danced on Fhe had askwe Fiddler
the portico of the plantation house while native Africans “did not to hire. Solomon Nort:
join in the dance with the others, but by themselves” clapped their was kidnapped and Se
hands and “distorted their frames.”'* This complex of two cultures, his ability as a Siddlen
side by side, influencing each other in intangible ways, led gradually relieved me of man G:
to the formation of an African American culture. me an honored seat a
Acculturation Acculturation proceeded at different rates in different colo- at Hages achieved what
The process of nies. African dancing took place in New Orleans in 1819 and later, earnings ied remained
change which while as early as 1694 a Black fiddler was playing for the dancing cepeouen tars —_ i . ;
eos when two of Whites in Virginia. This incident was recorded in a legal action A leval on me
different cultural brought by a minister against his daughter’s friends, who had pro- aachet themmenr nes
groups come faned his house by introducing a fiddler in the owner’s absence. The ‘neal a ee
into prolonged dancing had continued until Sund ing after church servi FE On -O:
coitace, g ha continued until Sunday morning a ter church services from Louisville to Cine:
had begun.” This same fiddler also might have played for the danc- three were described as
ing of his fellow slaves. had been playing at ba!
There also was considerable variety in the circumstances of slavery written permission to :
in the different colonies. Settled in 1690, Carolina had a Black major- objected to their act.
ity by 1708, while the northern states had only a small, scattered Black privileges permitted ri
population. Plantations in the southern colonies developed their desirous of freedom De
distinctive society, very different from the more urban society in the —

North. While slavery flourished in the South with the introduction Children’s Game Songs
of the cotton gin after the Revolution, slavery in the northern states References to and descz:
declined and gradually disappeared. As more and more Blacks were “play games” appear in
born in the New World, African festivals in the North diminished, from this period, and :
and were replaced by processions and parades that demonstrated the Administration (WPA) i:
dignity of the Black community. With the passage of time, dancing ‘oyed playing these game.
and singing by African Americans in the northern states tended to be of some sort. Children «
enjoyed in private rather than in public festivals in open fields. and dancing these game
and undoubtedly influen
Fiddlers ‘sith their peers, where t
Although the prejudice against dancing and fiddling was widespread ments of the adults, Whe:
throughout the South, many planters not only permitted the activi- reational dances among ¢:
ties, but encouraged them. James H. Hammond, of South Carolina, -acluded play-party Otis
penciled in his plantation manual: “Church members are privileged and lyrics that were ster”
to dance on all holyday occasions, and the class leader or deacon who 22le from the songs of W?
may report them shall be reprimanded or punished at the discretion >roaches to rhythm and t:
of the master.””° A more common attitude was expressed in the thir- An article published :-
teenth annual report of the Association for the Religious Instruction ces one of the earliest pe
of the Negroes in Liberty County, Georgia, in 1848: “With the negroes +ctican American childrer

42 African American Music ">Jer Folk Music

--- Page 9 ---
|
|
|
ods, [sic] dancing is a dissipating, demoralizing amusement....[It is incom- |
nese patible with] religion or good morals.””! “A Mississippi Planter” wrote | |
_ che to DeBow’s Review in 1851, “I have a good fiddler, and keep him well |
sich supplied with cat-gut, and I make it his duty to play for the negroes
cies [sic] every Saturday night until 12 o’clock.”” Some planters went so |
“eld, far as to provide music teachers for talented servants. |
ofa It was also customary fora planter to advertise in local newspapers |
= on ifhe had a slave fiddler of a good reputation whom others might wish
: ot to hire. Solomon Northup, a free Negro from upstate New York who }
qiele was kidnapped and sold into slavery in Louisiana, benefited from |
ares, his ability as a fiddler. His fiddle “introduced me to great houses—
cally relieved me of many days’ labor in the field—made me friends...gave
me an honored seat at the yearly feasts.”?? These obscure musicians | !
colo- at times achieved what would have been a professional status if their
watet, earnings had remained in their own pockets. Many of them earned a
“cing reputation for excellence that extended for miles around. j
Soren. A legal action filed in the Chancery Court of Louisville in 1844
. Dro- attached the steamboat Pike “to recover damages for the unauthor-
>, The ized transportation...of three slaves, Reuben, Henry and George... ‘
vices from Louisville to Cincinnati, whence they escaped to Canada.”*4 The |
Zanc- three were described as well-trained musicians who for several years
had been playing at balls and parties. Their owner had given them {
avery written permission to play in any part of the South, but of course he
~.ajOr- objected to their fleeing to Canada. The court found that the unusual
Black privileges permitted them rendered them restless under restraint and
| their desirous of freedom. Damages were denied. 4
-n the q
ction Children’s Game Songs
“states References to and descriptions of African American ring games and 3
-: were “play games” appear in journals and other contemporary writings q
«shed, from this period, and many ex-slaves reported in Works Progress q
--4 the Administration (WPA) interviews that both children and adults en- ‘
encing joyed playing these games, many of which involved bodily movements F.
= co be of some sort. Children were frequent observers of the adults singing .
and dancing these games, a situation that served didactic purposes q
and undoubtedly influenced the type of play the children engaged in q
with their peers, where they often mimicked the postures and move- q
-soread ments of the adults. When African American musicians played for rec- 4
. active reational dances among their own people, the musical repertoire often ene d
zvolina, included play-party songs. Many of these songs were based on melodies Paysite ot d 4
~ileged and lyrics that were similar to and sometimes almost indistinguish- young adults /
=4 who able from the songs of White pioneers, but modified with African ap- which originated q
=-retion proaches to rhythm and traditional performance practices. during slavery j
~~ e thir- An article published in The Journal of American Folk-lore in 1890 pro- and features a
“ction vides one of the earliest published descriptions of the manner in which games, singing, q
negroes African American children participated in “song-games” while at play.* and dancing. 4
a
Secular Folk Music 43 3
aa TIME irre rent

--- Page 10 ---
The article is based on the recollections of a Virginia-born servant who a
described her own experiences playing game-songs as a child sometime ig 4 z ——
during the nineteenth century. The games are described as “played by 7 lone a
as many children as possible in some open field or common, and gen- 5 ae -
erally towards the close of the day.”° The time of day identified for secu! a —_
this “play” activity is logical, given the fact that, during slavery, many songs ao _
children were also expected to labor and the time available to them for "eb cp close Big
amusements and recreation would be limited. The description also “i ar orien Lo
provides us with a glimpse into the manner in which the game songs Wek --- -
were played during the nineteenth century: “A circle is formed with one om Afiica—ie &
or more in the centre, all the players singing, and as far as possible suit- co sing hess oe
ing the action of the body to the words.””” <lisions . . _.
While some of these elements are universally found in children’s in Richm >= 1s
game-songs, such as use of circle formations and pantomime, African that they sex:
American children also incorporated stylized dance movements, commented. ~-
formations, and forms, such as those associated with the French qua- Still nase.
drille. Some of the songs required the children to partner with each southern stz=s:
other, a practice that is foreign to African traditional music perfor- ers from neizx>-
mance practices wherein men and women dance separately. Another workets wou: -
influence from Anglo-American or European cultures is the appear- and name tre:- |
ance of the words “lily-white hand” in the lyrics of one of the songs, a spurred on >+ =>
phrase that is frequently found in many Scottish, English, and Irish crew would r2s--
ballads, as well as in their transplanted versions sung throughout the to the Englis> =.
southern United States. musical comne-
The traditional children’s games that were collected after 1900 like- South. Wher 2
‘ly originated much earlier, such as “Green, Green Rocky Road,” “Little acclaimed, the 72.
Sally Walker,” “Loobie Loo,” and “Mary Mack.” Before the invention guests watelred! i
of sound recording, these games were widely known to be played but the minstrel t= =:
little noticed. While some of these songs were certainly borrowed and North as a cavic:-
adapted from Anglo song materials, many also demonstrated the Cither ames
same cultural underpinnings that were found in the music of African Indies, the cane 3
American adults, a trait that is also shared by children’s game songs of July signaled -
within African cultures. the tools were >--
followed a big ce
Work Songs Cotton picking
In Africa, singing frequently accompanied group work wherever it melodies” sung 2
took place, in the fields or on the water. This practice was easily trans- plantation to ane:
ferred to the New World wherever people worked in groups. Singing grinding hominy. .
coordinated their movements, lifted their spirits, enabled the slower singing, with the -
workers to keep up, and warded off fatigue. Singing could accompany Other oppor:
hoeing, planting, harvesting, picking cotton, grinding corn, cutting sailing vessels. H.
brush, laying railroad tracks, cutting wood, hauling fishing nets, or cargo needed song
rowing. Understandably, planters prized leaders with good, strong Alabama, for exaz~
voices, commanding personalities, and a strong sense of rhythm. from different co-
Along the coast, boat songs were frequently described by travelers from the West Ix.
and in memoirs by planters’ wives and daughters. Crews of four to singing shanties, -
44 African American Music Secular Folk Music

--- Page 11 ---
|
,
|
|
zight rowed boats in tidal rivers from one plantation to another or to |
the nearest city. The leader would sing a line, and the rowers would j !
chime in with a refrain. The words were often improvised and were |
sometimes compliments to the Passengers, sometimes merely uncon- j |
nected words and phrases. Or they could be more somber: there were q
songs about separation from loved ones, abuse by one’s Captain, or ’ |
longing for freedom, A good leader could speed the boat along, no a
matter how tired the crew might be. q |
Work and boat Songs continued a tradition that had been common q
in Africa—integrating music into daily life, Often, the chorus began 7
to sing before the leader had finished his call. Work songs could have a
religious words. When William Cullen Bryant visited a tobacco factory a
in Richmond in 1843, the workers sang, but his guide informed him ,
that they sang only sacred music (probably Spirituals). The guide 4 /
commented, “They will sing nothing else,” Ff
Still another widely reported Occasion for song throughout the 4 i
southern states was corn shucking. The planter would invite work- 4 ;
ers from neighboring plantations to come on a chosen day, Gangs of 4 /
workers would march, singing, to the appointed place, choose sides, __
and name their leaders. Each team would strive to outdo the other, a
spurred on by the magnificent voices of their leaders, to which the i |
crew would respond in chorus. This ceremony had some resemblance 3 '
to the English harvest home and corn huskings in the North, but the a |
musical competition and the improvised singing were peculiar to the q q
South. When all the corn had been shucked and the winning team , |
acclaimed, the feasting and dancing began. The planter’s family and
guests watched the fun from a distance, perhaps getting a foretaste of im
the minstrel theater then in its infancy, initiated by White men in the _
North as a caricature of African American music and dancing. ;
Other Crops inspired similar harvest celebrations, In the West :
Indies, the cane Song was reported. In middle Georgia, the Fourth =
of July signaled the end of the planting and cultivating season, Al] j }
the tools were brought in from the fields and piled together. There i }
followed a big celebration with much food, singing, and dancing, : |
Cotton picking lent itself ‘© group singing, “some wild, simple —
melodies” sung in a chorus, “so loud as to be heard from one =
plantation to another...for miles with musical echoes.”29 Flailing rice, =
grinding hominy, and braiding baskets all Provided opportunities for 3
singing, with the tempo adjusted to the task at hand. ' |
Other opportunities for group singing were observed aboard ; |
sailing vessels, Hoisting sails, winding the capstan, and loading =.
t catgo needed song to coordinate the movements of the men. Mobile, 4 |
Alabama, for example, became known as a shanty mart where sailors . 7
from different countries learned shanties from each other. Sailors 4 :
} from the West Indies were especially known for their Prowess at 4 |
singing shanties, Later, when steamboats replaced sailing vessels, 4
fo i
Secular Folk Music 45
ee

--- Page 12 ---
especially on inland rivers, firemen worked in a virtual inferno opera, Porgy zi
below decks. In 1850, Fredrika Bremer witnessed firemen on the Strawberry W-
Mississippi: a man standing on a pile of firewood improvised a song,
which was punctuated by the sound of wood being tossed to men Creole Songs
below. They responded in chorus while hurling firewood into the Quite distinc:
boat’s furnace.” French Creole
Work songs, however, did not need large groups. Plentiful reports enjoyed a Frar
exist of individuals participating in solo or solitary “work songs,” of manumiss: >
such as the singing of lullabies. Weaving, spinning, shoe shining, created a com:
cooking, and other examples of common work activities that might relatively pros:
have been engaged in by solo individuals were also frequently accom- Nowhere else
panied by singing. such mingling.
Another type of folk music that was typically practiced by lone Prench-spe.
individuals, or sometimes by an individual interacting with others, ing, and even =
Field holler or cry —_ was the field holler or field cry. These hollers and cries were generally socially by the °
Short, florid, described either by context, such as cotton field hollers or simply in business an¢
improvised field hollers, or by the specific function that they served, such as community, th:
melody sung by “water calls.” Eileen Southern cites a traveler’s diary written in 1853, pride. Afro-Cre<
a individual in which a moving description is presented of the field cries of several Opera orchestr,
working in the individual slaves: French music v.
fields, and call-and-res
Suddenly one [slave] raised such a sound as I had never heard before, a long,
loud musical shout, rising and falling, and breaking into falsetto, his voice the French Car?
ringing through the woods in the clear frosty night air, like a bugle call. As he music has beer.
finished, the melody was caught up by another, and then, another, and then, by the nineteenth c.
several in chorus."!
seven songs wer:
Like work songs, field hollers served multiple purposes. A hol-
ler could convey a request or communicate a need. Cries were also Protest Songs
emotional expressions, ways of communicating sadness, loneliness, The African trac
fatigue, or any other of myriad human emotions. ed to the Amer
The song form known as the “street cry” developed later and Gazette reported
was improvised by street vendors in southern cities. Street cries were night, numberir
highly functional, serving the purpose of describing what the vendor oy the men coz
was selling in terms calculated to attract or entice buyers. Although and the women
Charleston, South Carolina, and New Orleans have been especially curious anecdor:
noted for the skill of their street merchants in improvising distinctive ‘hen Europear
cries, examples of street cries could be heard throughout the South. 2 more subtle sz
Samuel A. Floyd Jr., in the introduction to The Power of Black Music, otherwise might
makes reference to “a blind seller of boiled and ‘parched’ peanuts who Improvising
peddled his wares by singing street cries and blues as he walked the making fun of ch
streets of [his] neighborhood, in Lakeland, Florida, in the 1940s and :ztense were spe
very early 1950s.”*’ Such scenes were common in Florida and other verses could easi.
southern states during this period and even later, with vendors who “orn songs. In I$
rode bicycles through Black neighborhoods using cries to advertise “2r ordering his -
fish for sale as well as vendors who traveled on foot using cries to sell careat of rain,
boiled or roasted peanuts. One of the most well-known portrayals .sader sang, “Tw:
of vendors using street cries can be heard in George Gershwin’s folk “27 vou,” to whic?
46 African American Music -22.. ar Folk Music

--- Page 13 ---
— Opera, Porgy and Bess, which features the characters of Crab Man and
, eke Strawberry Woman pedaling their goods in South Carolina,
pa Creole Songs Creole
ae Quite distinct from the folk songs of the eastern seaboard were the In Louisiana,
: French Creole songs of Louisiana. Many Blacks spoke French and historically a
: . See person of mixed
> rts enjoyed a Francophile culture. OF Sreater significance was the ease French and
~ os” of manumission under the French and Spanish governments, which African ancestry.
ning, created a comparatively large free Afto-Creole population that was
---ht relatively prosperous but mingled freely with the slave population.
_— Nowhere else in the United States did circumstances encourage
such mingling. i
erg French-speaking Afto-Creole families en joyed street parades, danc-
Zazrg, ing, and even French opera. Although free Blacks were not accepted 1
erally socially by the White population before the Civil War, their presence
ly in business and trade was familiar and customary. Within their own |
fa as community, the Creoles of color could move with assurance and
1353, pride. Afro-Creole musicians were taught by teachers from the French
eral Opera orchestra, and their folk music was heavily influenced by q
Prench music with the addition of African elements, such as rhythm
and call-and-response forms. Traditional Creole songs were known in q
oF the French Caribbean as well as on the mainland. Unfortunately, this
Teg music has been sorely neglected, and even less of it was collected in :
da. by the nineteenth century than other forms of Black folk music, although j
seven songs were included in Slave Songs of the United States.* 4
: ‘ : Protest Songs
css The African tradition of improvised derisive singing was easily adapt-
ed to the American scene. In September 1772, the South Carolina q
> and Gazette reported a “cabal of Negroes” near Charleston on a Saturday q
— night, numbering about 60 people: “The entertainment was opened 4
endor by the men copying (or taking off) the manners of their masters, q
.cugh and the women those of their mistresses, and relating some highly 4
-Zally curious anecdotes, to the inexpressible diversion of that company.”*4 3
— When Europeans were present, the entertainment usually involved 4
puth. a more subtle satire, which permitted the expression of ideas that 4
iLusie, otherwise might have been severely punished. 3
ents Improvising satire, sometimes too subtle to be recognized, and 3
se the making fun of the master and his family in ways that did not provoke q
sand offense were specialties of the African American improviser. Satiric q
other verses could easily be inserted in work songs, whether boat songs or {
=< who corn songs. In 1841, a song was described that criticized a preacher q
‘ertise for ordering his men to work on Sunday to harvest a crop before a 3
a5 wall threat of rain, thus violating traditional work atrangements. The 4
gals leader sang, “Twas on a blessed Sabbath day, Here’s a pretty preacher 4
5 folk for you,” to which the chorus responded, “It rain, boys, it rain.”§5 4
Secular Folk Music 47 {
oer
