--- Page 1 ---
merous battles agains: = =z
barrage ... chiefly a: <7: -a
Adding to the intensiz - =
Webb’s and Basie’s veri. =
Swing journals disiits-: :
mentators observed tri: | a
4 to Chick Webb’s New = >. 3
RD York scene at the enc =: .- «

way in black musical 2_.-_--

world in the late 193°: =. 7
oped the sophisticate2 - - 3
News from the Great Wide World Henderson, and Duke =. - =
’ created a complex a: 7
Count Basie, Duke Ellington, and Black Swing Bands with European classic:.° —2
middle-class dream cz <>: ~ ve
more elegant heights. ~~: 4%
isolated lower-class b-2:+ i-="
drive and abandon tn:: : 7"
people. Using fewer fir- . .0
exciting, lengthy soic: ---: 4
brought jazz’s quintes::--.. ;
At its best, the Basie rhythm section was nothing less than a Cadillac with the force of a Mack As Basie’s band gainz: ~ :
truck.—Dicky Wells place for himself in <=: +27
They were news from the great wide world, an example and a goal; and } wish that all those who the 1930s and 1940s. -= - _=
write so knowledgeably of Negro boys having no masculine figures with whom to identify would cial role that big ban<=-:-~
consider the long national and international career of Ellington and his band, the thousands of future for black Amez:. _-2
one-night stands played in the black communities of this nation. ... Luncefords, and swinz.-: 2
—Ralph Ellison, “Homage to Duke Ellington on His Birthday” of black culture in tr: _- 2
With New York as the: :.7 7a

When the curtain came down on Benny Goodman’s Carnegie Hall concert, tatives of the modern --
the Count Basie band and many of the other musicians present raced up- programs and recorc:.> um
town to the Savoy Ballroom in Harlem for the momentous battle of the and nightclubs. Whie >=
bands with the Chick Webb Orchestra. “That was one hell of a battle,” re- pressed heightened 2.2 =~. 7a
called Buck Clayton, Basie’s trumpeter. “All concerned were putting down and provided ecstatic 2° >=.
some heavy swing.” Metronome declared that Basie’s outfit, “a bluesplaying dance floor rituals. In ===> 21
(with variations) band if ever there was one, devoted its attack to the body, in new ways to offé: © :-.3
to the heart, with a steady hammering of truly sending rhythm figures, middle of the depress.:> + |
behind truly sensational solos.” On the other hand, Webb’s orchestra, the roes. The Pittsburgh ~~ a
house band at the Savoy all through the late 1930s and the winner of nu- Music.” If so, Basie wi: .. -e
94 NOW THEY CALL IT SWING, 1935-1942

a

--- Page 2 ---
i
merous battles against visiting hopefuls, aimed its “sensational, whirlwind
barrage ... chiefly at the ears and head with resounding arrangements.”

Adding to the intensity of the combat, Ella Fitzgerald and Billie Holiday,
Webb’s and Basie’s vocalists, respectively, battled for vocal supremacy.'
Swing journals disagreed over who won this epic battle, but most com-
mentators observed that Count Basie’s Kansas City band posed a challenge
to Chick Webb’s New York style of swing. Basie’s emergence on the New |
York scene at the end of 1936 suggests that significant changes were under |
way in black musical culture, changes that would affect the larger big band
world in the late 1930s. Both black and white East Coast bands had devel- | |
oped the sophisticated hot orchestra pioneered by Don Redman, Fletcher | |
Henderson, and Duke Ellington in the late 1920s and early 1930s. They had |
"created a complex art by merging folk elements of the black experience
with European classical forms and techniques. The style built on a black —
middle-class dream of the twenties to elevate the folk experience to grander,
more elegant heights. The Basie style, conversely, had emerged from the
isolated lower-class black ghetto of Kansas City and swung the blues with a
drive and abandon that expressed the desires and hopes of ordinary black
people. Using fewer formal arrangements, building the charts on a string of |
exciting, lengthy solos, the Basie band challenged the East Coast style and
brought jazz's quintessential populism to the fore in the mid-1930s.? |
As Basie’s band gained in popularity and influence, the Count earned a
place for himself in the pantheon of black bandleaders and musicians of
the 1930s and 1940s. In numerous essays Ralph Ellison highlights the spe-
cial role that big bandleaders and swing musicians played in defining a new
future for black America. Led by sophisticated Dukes, hip Counts, elegant | }
Luncefords, and swinging Chicks, big swing bands represented a flowering
of black culture in the urban centers of the African American migration.
With New York as their capital, these bands acted as the traveling represen- a
tatives of the modern city as they toured the nation, performed on radio
programs and recordings, and played for dancing at countless ballrooms |
and nightclubs. While they faced the indignities of segregation, they ex-
pressed heightened expectations for a people still bound by racial restraints \
and provided ecstatic communion to their many young followers in secular
dance floor rituals. In the big band, folk culture and modern life were united
in new ways to offer optimism—albeit tinged by hard reality—in the
middle of the depression. In the process black entertainers emerged as he-
roes. The Pittsburgh Courier declared that Ellington was the “Joe Louis of |
Music.” If so, Basie was its Henry Armstrong.’
NEWS FROM THE GREAT WIDE WORLD 95 |
|

--- Page 3 ---
1930s, Ellington’s stood as a 72:
- - ee a American culture. In the word:
Or ga os ee wy | of black urban sophistication —
ail oF Oe a ee eet ; a 4 and women dreamed of posses*
; a eo. i a ae ee cee ome eae ; As the capital of black swir.
‘ oO ‘ ‘ s gees e4 ; = ie - ae = ges music nationwide, but by the -
ae ae ea oe 7 a aa 7 —~ s = cs » So a major change. Basie’s rise to :
rea oo es ka gana i et < . i en : AY) modernization of folk currer.z:
i ee ce ay fe fa rar ecues : : prolonged depression that cuiz
} ; it ' : 6 Lee oS. ae * ‘ : es Se i 4 : York’s black youth—and the 72:
| Ve? Hl es we (0) fe Oe eu 4 ee in middle-class ideals of assirm:.:
Pee Ot ee tener
eae Aw. aa pean? 3 BOE pase ele Re co New York bands in order to w::
4 ' i eo: ia” ae ee Be fe | ea eS , As the Cotton Club and Conr.‘z
i AM fed s Ps L i Gs ‘a 5 2 ah e) ; A slumming in Harlem declined. =
aor) ie 1 C4 poe ee Theater and Savoy Ballroom 7:
=) hi a then that Count Basie and o-n:
= rc ee. their mark in New York. The’:
; ; black music that also deeply 22:
The Chick Webb Orchestra with Ella Fitzgerald, Apollo Theater, New York City, June 1938. Webb .
is the drummer. Note the streamlined music stands and platform. Frank Driggs Collection. Basie’s move from the isola:
the national prominence of E::
and political energies of the la: z:
Take the “A” Train by BlaGe music, in turn made >
According to Buck Clayton, a2
By the time Count Basie’s band arrived in New York in late 1936, Harlem ing for swing music, and we 2°:
had solidified itself as the jazz capital of black America, and Duke Ellington in New York.” Equally impor-::
was its king. As the glamorous musical representative of the Harlem Renais- directly involved. John Ham.
sance, Ellington saw the city as a place of freedom and recognition. Associ- radical, had just launched the .=
ated with the neighborhood since the late 1920s, he trumpeted Harlem as 1936 over a shortwave radio rer
occupying a special place in black music and mythology. Along with a swing critic in New York wit
Fletcher Henderson and other middle-class, professionally oriented band- was in a unique position to pr--
leaders, Ellington had helped create a New York big band synthesis, made rio’s success with Goodman en:
the Cotton Club symbolic of black jazz, and honed a sophisticated ap- Music Corporation of America *
proach to writing for a large jazz orchestra. As a result of national theater agent, to take the unheard-of s::
tours, motion picture appearances, and music publishing contracts, by the hewn black band in prime locz—
time of the swing band craze Ellington had already achieved fame and some the conservative agency beca.::
fortune. He lived in an elegant apartment in the Sugar Hill district of Har- Fascinated by jazz as an antic: <2
lem, mixed with the best of black society, and created superbly elegant mu- zation, Hammond was part of =:
sic in a stable orchestra. As Henderson’s orchestra declined in the early who looked to Basie as a symb :.
96 NOW THEY CALL IT SWING, 1935-1942
Ne

--- Page 4 ---
1930s, Ellington’s stood as a testament to the dream of a big-city African )
on American culture. In the words of one admirer, “Ellington was the epitome
of black urban sophistication—he was what men dreamed of becoming,
and women dreamed of possessing.”* |
As the capital of black swing, New York continued to influence black
music nationwide, but by the mid-1930s its musical style was undergoing |
, a major change. Basie’s rise to stardom owed a good deal to his powerful
i modernization of folk currents for a black population devastated by eco-
; nomic hardship, but still dreaming of a better life in the city. Mired in a
prolonged depression that culminated in the Harlem Riot of 1935, New |
York’s black youth—and the national black community—were losing faith
in middle-class ideals of assimilation and upward mobility. They turned to
the powerful riff-oriented blues bands of Kansas City or the more propulsive
New York bands in order to work out collective rituals on the dance floor. |
~ As the Cotton Club and Connie’s Inn moved downtown and as upper-class |
\ slumming in Harlem declined, black youths at the more democratic Apollo
Theater and Savoy Ballroom turned to music to achieve solidarity. It was
i then that Count Basie and other major Kansas City bands began to make |
a their mark in New York. Their regional style produced a regeneration in
oe black music that also deeply affected white swing bands.° |
_ Basie’s move from the isolation and poverty of the southwestern city to |
the national prominence of Harlem also owed a good deal to the cultural
and political energies of the larger swing world. Goodman’s success, shaped
by black music, in turn made black and white swing commercially viable.
According to Buck Clayton, after Goodman’s success, “They was [sic] look-
22 ing for swing music, and we played more swing music than all the bands
on in New York.” Equally important, the circle around Goodman was more '
= 215+ directly involved. John Hammond, the musical impresario and political |
Be SE radical, had just launched the Goodman band when he heard Basie in early |
TBS 1936 over a shortwave radio remote from the Reno Club in Kansas City. As :
A a swing critic in New York with his own column in Down Beat, Hammond |
bt de was in a unique position to promote Basie’s orchestra. The young impresa- |
‘oe rio’s success with Goodman enabled him to prevail on his close friend at
zD- Music Corporation of America, Willard Alexander, who was also Goodman’s |
ater agent, to take the unheard-of step of signing and promoting such a rough-
» eB hewn black band in prime locatioas. Alexander, in turn, had a freer hand at
Ime the conservative agency because his success with Goodman was still fresh. |
“are Fascinated by jazz as an antidote to America’s failed, machine-driven civili- :
og zation, Hammond was part of an interracial group of leftists and musicians
ee y who looked to Basie as a symbol of musical, emotional, and social freedom. |
NEWS FROM THE GREAT WIDE WORLD 97
|

--- Page 5 ---
A modern, improvising, free-spirited band rooted in the blues, Basie’s or- cars,” and “those jitney cab driv
chestra appeared a model of a more democratic America. Many in New South Parkway digging us on th
York’s swing world were “positive that this was going to be terrific,” noted they used to tell us about it.” ©;
promoter and music critic Helen Oakley, “this breath of something real that nati—“everywhere you went t>
swung,” that did “not bother with being commercial or anything else.” Un- you from those broadcasts an<
like Ellington, Jimmie Lunceford, or Cab Calloway, whom Hammond saw the band live.” For better or
as having lost touch with their folk roots, Basie represented a regional and leader out of Kansas City back
cultural authenticity that deserved national recognition.® that had been put up in lights ;
Commercial forces also played an important role in Basie’s rise to na-
tional fame. Swing was a moneymaker, and record companies and band Goin’ to Kansas City
agencies eagerly hoped to find popular orchestras capable of turning a
profit. After Hammond’s enthusiastic reviews, for instance, Joe Glaser, head Bands of national repute work::
of Associated Booking Corporation, signed away the band’s trumpeter, Lips played important roles in the -
Page. At the same time, Dave Kapp of Decca Records turned up in Kansas predecessors, black swing mus:.
City keen to add Basie’s orchestra to his stable of black bands for the juke- a black population suffering <>
box market; he signed the band to an exploitive recording contract that Hot bands offered temporary 72
lacked royalty payments. For Basie, who was earning $15 a week at the Reno vided a good deal more. As A:
Club, $750 a year for twenty-four sides per year was a lot of money. “It was music that “stomped” away pz:
devastating,” Hammond declared, “for both of us.” During the period when and white venues, these mus:-
Basie recorded his biggest hits, he made no money from record sales. The of solidarity, showed people fh: «
contract even fell below the American Federation of Musicians’ minimum and middle-class blacks in te.
scale for recordings. Although Basie would have been much better off fi- sophisticated New York style =:
nancially with a different record company, Decca’s promotion of his re- swing bands kept alive the °:.
cordings on jukeboxes helped spread his name among black and white celebration” and helped lister.:
swing fans.’ helped create a black cultura:
By late 1936, Basie was on his way to New York. Discovered and pro- Rather than losing their “>.
moted by a leftist jazz critic, booked by New York’s top band agency, and precision playing, the big bar.
signed to an important record contract, the Count stood at the confluence black community. They presic=.
of musical, economic, political, and racial currents at work in the swing in dance halls, theaters, and :.
world. Success in New York was crucial for national prominence. After an cinctly put it, the intense nav.
engagement at the Roseland Ballroom, where they played for white dancers, made the music part ofa large: ;
Willard Alexander booked the band into the Apollo Theater and the Savoy Ellington, for example, built :
Ballroom to give Basie exposure to audiences in Harlem. Success there, nature of the instruments. ==
noted Hammond, “guaranteed acceptance by blacks everywhere.” At the “speaking” instrumentation 22:
same time, Goodman included members of the Basie band in his Carnegie it or not. Count Basie’s heay ~
Hall concert, while Hammond made the band a major part of his Spirituals ion resonated with the deepé:-
to Swing Concerts in 1938 and 1939. Radio exposure at the Famous Door Whatever their outward appe::
on Fifty-second Street, arranged by Alexander and Hammond, brought the a tradition of reveling—roc7=-
band national attention. That “really did it for us,” Basie noted. People experience of blacks apart fr2 =
would drive “through Central Park listening to us on their radios in their cluded them, In their many :
98 NOW THEY CALL IT SWING, 1935-1942

--- Page 6 ---
|
cars,” and “those jitney cab drivers out in Chicago used to run up and down |
South Parkway digging us on their radios, too, and when we got back there, |
they used to tell us about it.” Out on the road—Dayton, Cleveland, Cincin-
nati—“everywhere you went there were all those people who knew about
you from those broadcasts and your records and were just waiting to see 2
the band live.” For better or worse, he was now “Count Basie, the band-
leader out of Kansas City back in New York . . . Count Basie was now a name
that had been put up in lights as a featured attraction on Broadway.”* |! |
} i
Goin’ to Kansas City |
Bands of national repute working out of New York in the 1930s and 1940s }
played important roles in the lives of their audiences. As had their blues j
predecessors, black swing musicians functioned as heroes and heroines for |
a black population suffering the effects of the depression and segregation.
Hot bands offered temporary relief from daily pressures, but they also pro-
vided a good deal more. As Albert Murray argues, black musicians created
music that “stomped” away personal and social troubles. Traveling to black
and white venues, these musicians created models of hope, played music
of solidarity, showed people how to address their troubles, and put working-
and middle-class blacks in touch with their roots. Whether in Ellington’s
sophisticated New York style or in Basie’s earthier Kansas City blues, black
swing bands kept alive the joy of life as they increased the “velocity of ; |
celebration” and helped listeners transcend the pain of daily life. They also f
helped create a black cultural unity around music.’ |
Rather than losing their “blackness” to sophisticated arrangements and |
precision playing, the big bands continued to play ceremonial roles in the a
black community. They presided as ministers of the Saturday night function
in dance halls, theaters, and clubs nationwide. As George Lipsitz has suc- |
cinctly put it, the intense nature of audience participation in black music
made the music part of a larger process of building cultural solidarity. When
Ellington, for example, built a band style on the “growling” or speaking
nature of the instruments, he was including blacks in the tradition of i
“speaking” instrumentation that went back to Africa, whether blacks knew
it or not. Count Basie’s heavy use of call and response in powerhouse fash- |
ion resonated with the deepest elements of the black religious experience.
Whatever their outward appearances, both Ellington and Basie represented
a tradition of reveling—rooted in the blues tradition—that glorified the
experience of blacks apart from the work-driven white world that often ex-
cluded them. In their many stomps, shouts, jumps, boogies, and other
NEWS FROM THE GREAT WIDE WORLD 99 f
a
a eo |

--- Page 7 ---
r oes nh Bela EB ok “MW de oe | At the highest level, Duke =.
: A\.3 @ 4 wf ? : : : ‘
(2 2B. Ee ee. E j 8 U , “ bi ‘ | be | | al the equality of black music ~~:
-e 2 ima & ee we i < “| dent that he achieved fame ‘-
; the Cotton Club or that he crx
7 it moved downtown in 1936 zr.
; ; the effects of segregation on F.:
t ay zi :
; an ae eae a in black music and art, demoz:-
(Cue: dic = a
ant {Ese of black culture. As part of th:
| i} aN ’ li musicians and music effective
no 2 a Le ee tend the vernacular tradition. |
ae. A 4 Re NE ne: ae . : s
=a “SR 4 ; Pe al (the likes of which no African -~
are. eas ons mA & : “there sounded the blues.” ir. =
te ae .
; ; ole? A _ especially its tonal range ar:
a cI “s “ yon van a ae Ree, in strated its equality with class:::
Pe RELAY, & ORS ee us az, but rather “esentie=
re oe oe ‘ . ; a . ,
® a + ; eee ee. oo ad \: ae expression.”
me A in i a ha aS ‘I 4 yr ek His forays into advanced :
At at : nis f “fee fi i a f if’ a i 5 ” “ ;
E\ N ) A te oy Ae Ay Z ! ge ad Di an Toodle-oo” and “Black and Tez. :
: \\, Nee ee ee ae os ‘ 1930s wi a
Ny | \GRR ‘ a et 4 s with greater self-consc: :
Ce a * i FS rae ae . Cn — -f-% pean acclaim and the Americ:
i ve A | aaa Wie ) i ae or a minated in his first theater rm:
a4 ‘ ?
ibe Pa te n | c Pa Z ie “pl fe =e.
mis - . fs : ie position “Black, Brown and ==
I 1 aw } t LN yy cae ee. concerts during the 1940s. El:r
a : , i af re ; .
> |) a = a ae black artists could meet white :-
1p : sic stands, in direct contrast <:
ey es OE eg the first decade of the centur.
ai ys 7 - ing composed of untrained =:
i _ ~a ; ae complishments, “during the 27.
“ ee = a orchestrators, and arrangers +=
tempting to make something u>
The Duke Ellington Cotton Club Orchestra, 1932. Note the elegant attire of the musicians, the ments of the blues and jazz. =.
art deco appearance of the band, and the clear division of the brass from the reed section. Frank many other black bands, whic>
Driggs Collection. .
the much more unpretentio=: :
While Ellington represenz=2
dance tunes, these bands were both raising the roof and extending a sense of the modern city, Basie in ms:
of kinship. Most important, as Basie’s Kansas City style came to the fore in lism of jazz as he sought to s~
front of black audiences—rather than the many white ones for whom Elling- from a middle-class family. 2-3
ton played—working-class musicians and working-class audiences had a aloof from rougher musicians
chance to exult, strut, and reclaim their sense of personhood and creative completed the ninth grade. a> =
power from an impersonal, mechanized world.’ whiskey and prostitutes. Borz. --
100 NOW THEY CALL IT SWING, 1935-1942
"Hil phi

--- Page 8 ---
At the highest level, Duke had worked since the late 1920s to establish _
the equality of black music with European classical music. It was no acci- |
dent that he achieved fame in Harlem in the 1920s playing for whites at |
the Cotton Club or that he continued to play for the segregated club after _
it moved downtown in 1936 and all through the late 1930s. He recognized
the effects of segregation on black artists, but he continued to put his faith | |
in black music and art, demonstrating the equality and even the superiority
of black culture. As part of the Harlem Renaissance, he showed that black
musicians and music effectively could utilize European techniques to ex-
tend the vernacular tradition. “Familiar beneath the stylized jungle sounds | |
(the likes of which no African jungle had ever heard),” noted Ralph Ellison,

“there sounded the blues.” In extending the possibilities of black music—
especially its tonal range and harmonic complexity—Ellington demon-
strated its equality with classical traditions. To Ellington it was no longer
just jazz, but rather “essentially Negro music, and the elaborations of self _
expression.”!!

His forays into advanced composition, starting with “East St. Louis
Toodle-oo” and “Black and Tan Fantasy” in the late 1920s, continued in the
1930s with greater self-consciousness. This impulse, stimulated by Euro-
pean acclaim and the American Left’s support for jazz as artistic music, cul-
minated in his first theater musical, Jump for Joy (1941), his extended com- z
position “Black, Brown and Beige” (1943), and his annual Carnegie Hall
concerts during the 1940s. Ellington showed white and black America that
black artists could meet white standards. His band played from behind mu-
sic stands, in direct contrast to James Reese Europe’s Orchestra, which in
the first decade of the century had had to convey the impression of be- |
ing composed of untrained natural musicians. As a result of his many ac- '
complishments, “during the thirties and forties ... many jazz composers, |
orchestrators, and arrangers were following the example of Ellington, at-
tempting to make something uniquely their own out of the traditional ele-
ments of the blues and jazz.” Ellington’s success thus opened the door for
many other black bands, which developed their own unique sounds—even |
the much more unpretentious orchestras, such as Basie’s.'”

While Ellington represented the elegant artistic possibilities of jazz and |
of the modern city, Basie in many ways expressed the quintessential popu-
lism of jazz as he sought to swing the blues. Unlike Ellington, who came
from a middle-class family, graduated from high school, and held himself
aloof from rougher musicians, Basie hailed from the working class, barely | |
completed the ninth grade, and in his early days reveled in the fast life of
whiskey and prostitutes. Born in 1904 into a Red Bank, New Jersey, family,

NEWS FROM THE GREAT WIDE WORLD 101 /
i
|
_ |
— ——,

--- Page 9 ---
he left home at an early age to find employment and liberation in the world of opportunities for sociz. =
of entertainment. Drawn to Harlem in the early 1920s by the growing the- culture.'®
ater and club scene, he apprenticed with New York stride piano greats such Working the many c:27: :
as Fats Waller for a year, and might have ended up a piano player and band- Basie immersed himself i=. =:
leader in the New York tradition. However, on the road with Gonzelle As the depression forcec <7
White and Her Jazz Band, he was stranded in Kansas City in 1927. He joined to the detriment of tour:=:z
the Blue Devils and the Bennie Moten Orchestra and immersed himself in black musicians from th: =
the clubs and dance halls of a wide-open river town under the tolerant spots. Although pay was ro
tutelage of a corrupt political boss. When Bennie Moten died in 1935, Basie remained isolated from =:~.
assembled elements of both bands into a nine-piece unit and brought the bypassed Kansas City, ar. = 2
Kansas City style to full flower. Both Basie and his star singer, Jimmy Rush- mal events dominated =~ --~
ing, were initially strangers to the blues, but in Kansas City they learned the cians themselves. Isolat:: > =.
hard-driving southwestern blues style in order to please lower-class black the influence of region:. -..
audiences. Reared musically in a black ghetto environment to be less depen- voring the jam session = :.2-
dent on written arrangements, he was more firmly grounded than Ellington ment in the city’s jazz c2.7_>
or the other New York bandleaders in the oral tradition of black culture, sicians played for thems:
which emphasized collective, spontaneous musical creation." continuous sessions as 4°:
Basie differed from many of the other black bandleaders in his working- proficiency. As Basie saic |»
class origins. His band, rakish in the extreme, was not made up of the col- job we’d play on, ther z: .
lege men whom one might find in Jimmie Lunceford’s orchestra. According don’t think money was =.. 77.
to bassist Gene Ramey, Basie’s players “didn’t believe in going out with too much about bread.” ~--:
steady black people.” Instead, “they’d head straight for the pimps and pros- ing with other musiciar: 2- |
titutes and hang out with them. Those people were like a great advertise- spontaneous collective <r: -7
ment for Basie.” Indeed, at New York’s Apollo, recalled trumpeter Buck Clay- Despite an increase =: : .
ton, “it would seem sometimes that all of the first rows of the theater would arrangements, required ::: -.
be filled with guys smoking pot. It would drift up on the bandstand but to New York conveyed n= =
nobody minded. They were all our pals and we were playing just for them.” the Kansas City jam sess: :>
Andy Kirk, another Kansas City leader, was considered, Ramey noted, “too the eastern style with az: -
uppity,” but the Count “was down there, lying in the gutter, getting drunk in the highly arranged *::»
with them. . . . All of his band was like that.” In those days, the Count was rhythm sections set the 72:
always looking for a “taste” of liquor or a dice game; his nickname stuck Chick Webb on drums. -== =>
because Bennie Moten would call him “no ‘count” for his habit of ignoring ing beat was rooted in t+ 2.
matters of business. ever, was neither comyp: s-_
Basie’s demeanor—and his music—reflected the Kansas City milieu. member of the rhythm s=:~
Symbolized by the blues, Kansas City fostered and preserved more tradi- son, Basie “was and is tn= =
tional elements of black preindustrial oral culture than did New York. Com- around on the piano unz
pared to those of New York and Chicago, its black middle class was small and Jo Jones [drums] «:_ :
and its ideology of progress and assimilation negligible. Instead, its black when he started it they «:-7
population drew its cultural identity from employment in meat packing, make the Basie rhythm <=:-
the river trade, and construction. Proximity to the South and the absence commonly called. “Wh2z: > --:
102 NOW THEY CALL IT SWING, 1935-1942

--- Page 10 ---
of opportunities for social mobility maintained the strength of rural folk !
culture." |
Working the many clubs protected by the corrupt Pendergast machine, :
Basie immersed himself in the distinctive musical culture of the Southwest. ,
As the depression forced the collapse of jazz in the surrounding territories,
to the detriment of touring bands, Kansas City jazz flourished, attracting
black musicians from the entire region to its nearly fifty mob-run night
spots. Although pay was poor, work was plentiful. Yet the city and its music
remained isolated from national jazz currents. The national media largely |
bypassed Kansas City, and as a result, jazz performances continued as infor-
mal events dominated by the rituals and interactions created by the musi-
cians themselves. Isolation also shaped the music stylistically by deepening
the influence of regional blues styles on the city’s jazz bands and by fa-
voring the jam session mode of performance, which served as the key ele-
ment in the city’s jazz culture. Without hope for national recognition, mu-
sicians played for themselves and for the black community, using the
continuous sessions as a way to test their manhood and their instrumental PY
proficiency. As Basie said, “I mean, the cats just played. ... We’d go to one
job we’d play on, then go jamming until seven, eight in the morning. I
don’t think money was all that important then. . . . We never really thought
too much about bread.” The jam session emphasized the sheer joy of play-
ing with other musicians and kept alive the African American tradition of |
spontaneous collective creation.!° =
Despite an increase to fourteen musicians and the use of more written
atrangements, required for national bookings, the band that Basie brought
to New York conveyed the improvisational freedom and collective spirit of
§ the Kansas City jam session. Equally important, the band set itself off from
the eastern style with a powerful 4/4 rhythm based on extended riffs. Even |
; in the highly arranged New York bands of Ellington and Lunceford, the
rhythm sections set the pace. In fact, Ellington and Basie on piano, and
: Chick Webb on drums, led their bands from the rhythm section. The pulsat-
ing beat was rooted in the dance and had to propel the dancers. Basie, how-
ever, was neither composer nor arranger. Rather, he considered himself a
member of the rhythm section. According to trumpeter Harry “Sweets” Edi-
i son, Basie “was and is the greatest for stomping off the tempo. He noodles
: around on the piano until he gets it just right ... Freddie Green [guitar] |
4 and Jo Jones [drums] would follow him until he hit the right tempo and :
i when he started it they kept it.” In addition, Walter Page on bass helped | |
make the Basie rhythm section the “all-American rhythm section,” as it was
t commonly called. “What other rhythm section?” asked Jo Jones. Duke’s was
NEWS FROM THE GREAT WIDE WORLD 103
; |
j \
q |
|

--- Page 11 ---
great, but “always for presentation.” In fact, no other rhythm section could said, “One o’clock jump. ->
equal the drive of Basie’s, with its propulsive, linear thrust, light yet strong, into the riffs, and the riffs _
rooted in the earth yet floating above it at the same time. As trombonist then we just went on playin
Dicky Wells declared, “Basie’s rhythm section was nothing less than a Cadil- In a collective framewe-* -
lac with the force of a Mack truck.”?” players for longer solos. T=2 :~
In Basie’s band all the instruments helped build the rhythm. After he grounds became a central 72:7.
laid down the tempo, Basie “set a rhythm for the saxes first... then he’d New York. His superb trux.z+-
set one for the bones and we’d pick that up. Now it’s our rhythm against formed the Armstrong sty --
theirs,” Wells noted. “The third rhythm would be for the trumpets. .. . The varied the band’s rhythm:: =:
solos would fall in between the ensembles, but that’s how the piece would and Herschel Evans, assuz~=2
begin.” Piano, reeds, and brass all interacted to keep the beat alive. More- light. Young had a light. 72.2:
over, the band relied on the riff style of Kansas City to set soloists and seemed to float above the 7=:-
sections against each other. Favored in jam sessions, riffs, or short, repeated best advantage in “Blue 27.2 ‘es
rhythmic phrases, were often created spontaneously; they were powerful soon became “a set-up thin: ”
waves of sound that set a rhythmic groove and built to a climax. The solo- going on between them. 7:
ists played a key role, for they intensified the rhythm and took off from it. thing to shoot at, and Lz:7:- |
Basie maintained that he developed his ideas of how the solos and sections really was a special kind :: ::-
should sound at the Reno Club in Kansas City. He created his “own way of The singers in the ban: =
opening the door for them to let them come in and sit around awhile. mond’s behest, he added =....-
Then fhe] would exit them.” All of it eventually climaxed in shouting brass lar appeal, Basie found 2 :27<-
choruses that kept the dancers moving and provided them with a sense of sense of tempo, and a per. : u
ecstatic release. As a result, everything “becomes goodtime music because brief, she proved the peéz=> -
they always maintain the velocity of celebration.” said, Billie “had a fantasz: |:
The riff structure allowed Basie to unite unique individual contributions the words to make ther * °:
to a collective sound with a minimum of formal planning, a process at the couldn’t swing, she coulé- - -,
heart of the African American improvisatory tradition. Ellington composed such as “Swing! Brother. s. ~~:
the talents of his musicians into miniature orchestral gems, while Hender- spurring them to greater ~2 =
son, Lunceford, and Webb relied on well-written arrangements. Basie, on Take That Away from Mz ---
the other hand, reduced the process to its essence, combining down-home more, her voice expressec <7: :
blues with popular dance music and the arranged performance with the conveyed undertones of === =z
jam session. The simple riff structure gave soloists room to improvise that and exorcised.”'
no formal arrangement could match. In the Basie band, Clayton noted, first In essence, then, Basie => . 22
one person would play a phrase, and “we all had to follow. If you could dition of allowing both 3:::-.
think of a riff quicker than anybody else, then we'd all follow you.” Mean- his band a band of brothe:: --
while, the soloist would be “blowing away.” From this process emerged tion. “Everybody seeme2 -: ~
many of Basie’s early “head” compositions, initially unwritten charts playing together, and thz
worked up on the stand by musicians jamming together and playing their such a team spirit amor: -- -«
own ideas. Basie’s role was to select what people were playing and shape it. you stood there looking iE 2
His theme song, “One o’Clock Jump,” was created in this manner. The band you were a part of it.” 4:
needed a number to close the radio show, and Basie looked at the clock and perfected that style, givizs -
104. NOW THEY CALL IT SWING, 1935-1942
a

--- Page 12 ---
LS said, “‘One o’clock jump.’ And we hit with the rhythm section and went
z into the riffs, and the riffs just stuck. We set the thing up in D-flat, and
37 then we just went on playing in E”!9
ce In a collective framework, the Count learned how to position individual
players for longer solos. The string of solos set against tight ensemble back- |
oe grounds became a central feature of the band’s identity and style once it hit
ES New York. His superb trumpeters, Buck Clayton and Sweets Edison, trans-
a formed the Armstrong style into southwestern riff solos that intensified and
ne varied the band’s rhythmic groove. His unique tenor sax men, Lester Young |
a and Herschel Evans, assumed center stage and battled, to the crowd’s de- |
“2 light. Young had a light, relaxed sound and a horizontal melodic feel that |
ni seemed to float above the beat, while Evans had a big soulful tone heard to
aS best advantage in “Blue and Sentimental.” Unintended at first, their battles
fn. soon became “a set-up thing,” so “people really thought there was a feud
oe going on between them.” If Herschel led off, “he really gave Lester some-
=. thing to shoot at, and Lester did the same thing.” According to Basie, “It
e2 really was a special kind of battle,” and each player had his own fans.?°
a: The singers in the band were equally adept with solos. When, at Ham- |
- mond’s behest, he added Billie Holiday in 1937 to give the band more popu- |
ag8 lar appeal, Basie found a superb singer with a unique jazz voice, a flawless
EE sense of tempo, and a penchant for singing by ear. Although her stay was
age brief, she proved the perfect vocalist for this rhythm machine. As Edison
said, Billie “had a fantastic conception of when to sing and how to place |
Ts the words to make them swing ... she could swing anything.... If she
tne couldn’t swing, she couldn’t have been in Basie’s band.” On fast numbers,
anc such as “Swing! Brother, Swing,” she traded riffs with the other musicians,
oe spurring them to greater heights, and on slow tunes, such as “They Can’t
ee Take That Away from Me,” the lift in her voice sparked the band. Further- |
me more, her voice expressed the dualism of a blues sensibility: her exuberance
the conveyed undertones of the pain of life and love that the band transformed |
cae and exorcised.?!
nee In essence, then, Basie encapsulated in musical performance the folk tra-
ded dition of allowing both assertion of individuality and cooperation. He made
ET his band a band of brothers in the image of the Blue Devils, his first inspira-
ced tion. “Everybody seemed to be having so much fun just being up there
irs playing together, and they looked and sounded good to boot. There was /
= ELS such a team spirit among those guys, and it came out in the music, and as
ti you stood there looking and listening you just couldn’t help wishing that
aod, you were a part of it.” As drummer Jo Jones noted, the early Basie band
are perfected that style, giving its players “the feeling of a small band. The |
NEWS FROM THE GREAT WIDE WORLD 105
)
—_— |

--- Page 13 ---
_
[ ca a oe ae P's Speckled Red’s “The Dir =) > °
Ue i Bh ee dee ay S A, a Mees z he wanted “to be the sez > =
ahs ae 7 : . * | Negroes, high and low. zz>2- =
a : re 9 ee mS a a ay : Yet, this was a blues sii ot
ae oe ah d icy a sd ae oe a ee Le i, J . finds a different note thz:--- _-—.g
ae bac ee oe ans oe | ra Wf aoe ig 4 the distinctive quality az-:- ~ — @
ad oe te a me eo y i ae ys imposed “a romantic Iyricis- . > ¥ 4
are , i a ee f the D a
(= a io Se pee Sonn eS SO Ee an
ea 2a SF ee eae a aa frontier.” His voice contz:: .-  —™
mB A - oe (ft i es ok | those Negroes, who, like Fu:- -: wy
ee ee ee of amore human way of *: =
ee ae ee nu Fane HS, woe we
Se er ee and “Good Morning Blues -- =-=
The Count Basie Band, with Helen Humes, Brooklyn Paramount, 1941. Personnel, left to right: conflicts between men ar-< - “aT
Trumpets, Harry Golson, Al Killian, Ed Lewis, Buck Clayton; Trombones, Ed Cuffee, Dicky Wells, ture in general and so prctz>.:
Dan Minor; Saxes, Buddy Tate, Tab Smith, Earl Warren, Jack Washington, Don Byas. Lester Young blues he still managed fo oe a
had left, but the “all-American rhythm section” was still intact: Freddie Green, guitar; Walter over all the circumstances «>=: + --
Page, bass; Jo Jones, drums; and Basie, the master of swing piano. Frank Driggs Collection.
man failings.” Recognizing = _~ .- a
ers optimism about their >-_-- .
arrangements were almost all ‘heads,’ and no matter how many men we achieved national fame arm--: -
had at any one time, there was all the freedom and flexibility of a small 1930s and early 1940s, Rus=-. 4
unit. This was not true of the other large bands.” It was this sense of per- a wider American audience :~-- -7
sonal assertion, group identity, and control over one’s fate that came out in circumspect about the hurin . ~ 3
the supreme joy that the band expressed.” Rooted in the blues and !- - ... 1
In other ways, Basie promoted black cultural solidarity in the modern vided other forms of recogniz::> _- z
world (represented by the professional orchestra) by organizing his music cans in the urban environm=:--° 7"
around remembered folk traditions. One key was his use of the basic blues response pattern of Africar ~_ |
and boogie woogie forms, the AAB song format, and the chord progressions churches. Basie recalled that =. -- v-
that this engendered. Moreover, Jimmy Rushing, who went back to the Blue Rushing occasionally attence2 .- 7:
Devils days, was one of the first authentic blues singers to perform in a big in the Bud”... anda coupiz :: =
jazz band setting. Ironically, neither he nor Basie knew the blues until they with those church folks, anc --- «.
migrated to Kansas City, where they were forced to immerse themselves in Count played the organ, “they ::7-
the blues to please working-class audiences. The whole band drew on the guess it showed that we hadr.-- -:
blues for tonality, and they bent notes, in contrast to the more technically joints we hung out in.” Indeez ~-- -
precise players of the New York bands. Many Basie numbers, noted Jo Jones, organ, and play it. “We’d havs - >
“apdated” blues songs of the 1920s, such as Pinetop Smith’s “Boogie Woo- We'd just have it shouting lik: ~ - =
gie,” Leroy Carr’s “How Long Blues” and “When the Sun Goes Down,” and the Spirit.” His “Ride On” actz:. -
106 NOW THEY CALL IT SWING, 1935-1942
Oo  ”

--- Page 14 ---
Speckled Red’s “The Dirty Dozen.” In fact, Basie told one interviewer that

he wanted “to be the social interpreter of blues music, the language of all

Negroes, high and low, upright and ornery, alley and avenue.”??
Yet, this was a blues tradition of the southwest, not the deep South,

Ralph Ellison reminds us. In his analysis of Jimmy Rushing’s singing, he

finds a different note than the despair often heard in delta blues. In part,

; the distinctive quality arose from Rushing’s earlier ballad singing, which |
imposed “a romantic lyricism upon the blues tradition . . . a lyricism which _
is not of the Deep South, but of the Southwest: a romanticism native to the
frontier.” His voice contains an “optimism in it that echoes the spirit of
those Negroes, who, like Rushing’s father, had come to Oklahoma in search
of a more human way of life.” He was no shouter. Instead, he “maintained

_ the lyricism which has always been his way with the blues.” In “Take Me
| Back Baby,” “Sent for You Yesterday,” “Going to Chicago,” “I Left My Baby,”
and “Good Morning Blues,” he sang the hurts of family separation and the
—— conflicts between men and women that were so much a part of black cul- —
Ss, ture in general and so problematic in the 1930s. Yet in the language of the
LE blues he still managed to convey “an assertion of the irrepressibly human |
Sas over all the circumstances whether created by others or by one’s own hu-
man failings.” Recognizing human limits, Rushing encouraged in his listen-
ers optimism about their future and their very humanity. As the band /
LOWE achieved national fame among white as well as black swing fans in the late ! |
HB 1930s and early 1940s, Rushing could spread “the appeal of the blues to _
ace a wider American audience after the Depression had made us a bit more
J2 8 circumspect about the human cost of living our ‘American way of life.’”?*

Rooted in the blues and in black working-class life, moreover, Basie pro- _
wa vided other forms of recognition and cultural continuity for African Ameri-
oS cans in the urban environment. The riff style originated in the call-and- |
es response pattern of African music, which remained alive in the black
ins churches. Basie recalled that even when playing Kansas City dives, he and
Paae Rushing occasionally attended church together. “Jimmy used to sing “Rose
g TE in the Bud” ... and a couple of other church songs. Jimmy was at home
aie with those church folks, and they just loved him in there.” And since the
a8in Count played the organ, “they appreciated what both of us were doing. I
eS guess it showed that we hadn’t forgotten our upbringing in spite of all the
aT joints we hung out in.” Indeed, the two used to steal into church, open the
tlds organ, and play it. “We’d have it shouting in there. Nothing sacrilegious.

Pelle We'd just have it shouting like when the whole congregation was feeling q
* Eton the Spirit.” His “Ride On” actually functioned as a sermon, with the band |
NEWS FROM THE GREAT WIDE WORLD 107
|
|
_
‘es

--- Page 15 ---
doubling as a choir and chanting “ride on” in the background. In fact, Gene right,” were well know >
Ramey notes, “the Kansas City sound was like an old-time revival... . You “House Rent Boogie,” “222
hear the people shouting, you hear that in Basie’s band.””° (“One o’Clock Jump,” °7-=
The shouting brass style embodied in the riffs of Basie’s orchestra, as ences and shout licks arz *-
in “Shout and Feel It,” however, aimed at this world’s salvation, not the sion for blacks, solidified -- =
consolation of the next world. Moreover, other elements in the music ex- ter future.
pressed a sense of joy that was not to be found in the industrial, workaday Black bands displavec = -
white world that had rejected black people in general and black youth in Basie orchestra’s ability tc =>:
particular. The band seemed to strut and exult, to recognize that pleasure embellishments stripped 213
and the expression of one’s feelings were more important than the daily With its integrated rhvth=..:
grind. The rooting of the music in the jam session meant that performance along in horizontal fash: <=
time—human time, emotional time—was more important than industrial improvement through <<: 2
demands. The music was less a commodity than a means to respond to the emerged from the bandi2:2
world. As E. J. Hobsbawm reminds us, for working-class black musicians jazz ample, described himsel* =:
was “a continuous means of asserting oneself as a human being, an agent rated its rhythms into his =
in the world and not the subject of others’ actions, as a discipline of the about trains. I love the w:-
soul, a daily testing, an expression of the value and sense of life, a way away.... I like the way =>
to perfection.”*° things with the whistle. +7
That marvelous sense of “lived time,” as opposed to industrial time, also riding them and hearing <7.
expressed itself in the band’s distinctive sound. Even as the band roared place to place, the sound :-
ahead with the increasing speed of the modern world, the players retained Both leaders put their fs:
a relaxed, lag-behind-the-beat rhythm that preserved the dimension of per- music. Ellington did “Tex:
sonal integrity. Similarly, the band had a sensual quality. In its best numbers Choo,” and “Happy Go Lu:
the band built to roaring climaxes in which musicians and audiences “got “Super Chief” and “9:20 Sz
off.” Playing off each other in call-and-response patterns over a tight ano chorus that Basie plav=:
rhythm section, the brass and the reeds wove sinuous lines that ended in cymbals in “One o’Clock 7:
release. Basie’s female singers, Billie Holiday and later Helen Humes, were a train pulling into or out :-
fleshy women singing of love and its pain while embodying the delights of ensemble passages, as on “= -
passion. In her youth, Billie was a beauty whose enunciation of the word of the train whistle. The bz:
“baby” held out sensual offerings. In “One Hour with You,” Humes from that of locomotive ps:
breathed the delights she would bring to an hour of hoped-for passion. the connection explicit: it +
Rushing’s blues numbers always implied sexual knowledge, as in “Nobody coast trains that used to ge s
Knows (But My Baby and Me).” lightning, going west to Cz.
Many of the band’s numbers referred to black experience or to current The locomotive quality -
jive. “Down for the Double” derived from gambling, while “It’s Sand, Man” lief in the future, albeit one
referred to a light shuffle-step dance. In jive language, however, if someone had an urban destination as
was “sanding you,” it meant he was bowing and scraping like a servant, an to northern cities, the “pror
Uncle Tom—which the song inveighed against. At the same time, one rett, during the 1930s in his
sanded to get to know a woman. In “Ain’t It the Truth,” the band made was our heaven. ... We hac
references to the old jive saying, which, like “honey, hush” and “well, all substitute dreams of what vc
108 NOW THEY CALL IT SWING, 1935-1942
a _

--- Page 16 ---
‘act, Gene right,” were well known by black people. The boogies (“Boogie Woogie,” | |
2... You “House Rent Boogie,” “Red Bank Boogie,” “Basie Boogie”) and the jumps
(“One o’Clock Jump,” “Jumpin’ at the Woodside”), filled with folk refer-
“estra, as ences and shout licks and choruses, touched on the realities of the depres- zz
. not the sion for blacks, solidified the group around them, yet pointed toward a bet- |
music ex- ter future. _
workaday Black bands displayed a fascination with trains, but none equaled the
.outh in Basie orchestra’s ability to transform itself into a powerful locomotive, with
: pleasure embellishments stripped away and human movement the central function.
che daily With its integrated rhythmic section as its foundation, the Basie band drove
Tormance along in horizontal fashion, reproducing a fundamental American myth of
cndustrial improvement through geographic mobility. The appeal of this metaphor
-ad to the emerged from the bandleaders’ delight in trains. Duke Ellington, for ex-
clans jazz ample, described himself as a minstrel who traveled by train and incorpo-
- an agent rated its rhythms into his music, while Basie declared that he was “crazy
iné of the about trains. I love the way they sound, whether they are close up or far |
ute. a way away. ... I like the way the bell claps and also all the little ways they do
things with the whistle. And I also like the way they feel when you are
ime, also riding them and hearing them from the inside.” As the band rambled from
.-d roared place to place, the sound of the train “was music” to him.?’ a
zs retained Both leaders put their fascination with trains, travel, and movement into
on of per- music. Ellington did “Take the ‘A’ Train,” “Day Break Express,” “Choo |
<. numbers Choo,” and “Happy Go Lucky Local,” while Basie turned out his powerful
znices “got “Super Chief” and “9:20 Special.” Albert Murray notes that the bell-like pi- a
“=: a tight ano chorus that Basie played against the steady 4/4 of the bass, guitar, and
.. ended in cymbals in “One o’Clock Jump” suggests “the arrival and departure bell of |
umes, were a train pulling into or out of a station.” And, the tonal coloration of Basie’s |
éelights of ensemble passages, as on “9:20 Special,” sound like sophisticated extensions
= the word of the train whistle. The basic Kansas City rhythm almost seems to derive
. Humes from that of locomotive pistons. In referring to “Super Chief,” Basie made |
2 passion. the connection explicit: it was “another one of those super express coast-to-
2. Nobody coast trains that used to go streaking across those Kansas plains like greased
lightning, going west to California and east to Chicago and New York.””* i
- 7 current The locomotive quality of the bands’ sound connoted a continuing be-
Sand, Man” lief in the future, albeit one grounded in reality. The propulsive movement
= someone had an urban destination as its locus of freedom. The train would take one
servant, an to northern cities, the “promised land.” According to newsman Vernon Jar-
- time, one rett, during the 1930s in his part of the country, Paris, Tennessee, “Chicago |
sand made was our heaven. ... We had a world of dreamers,” for black people had “to |
~2 swell, all substitute dreams of what you thought might be the real world one day.” In |
NEWS FROM THE GREAT WIDE WORLD 109
!
{

--- Page 17 ---
general, the dreams centered “around the North,” where “everybody [was] incomparable arranger Bi
treated equal” and oppression was absent. For him, the city was a place of ing quality of other swins
hope, and the ghetto “had a beat, it had a certain rhythm, it was all hope.” early forties, such as “Cot
When World War II began, he enlisted to get to Chicago.” Webb, leader of the house
Part of that dream lay in personal freedom. Jarrett recalled, “Up here you to work the dancers into
could just let your hair down” and “reclaim yourself as a man or become a That Way,” “In the Groov
woman.” And as the beat underlying the lyrics of many songs indicated, most rhythmic bands ca:
one could triumph over sexual distance and find romantic and sexual free- served as the organizing
dom. Rushing’s high and clear voice combined romantic lyricism with the then Count Basie.22
blues to form a double vision of love: the pains and partings combined with It was through dance r
the continued hope of love and romance. Many of the other major voices of bands performed their m.
the day, such as Ella Fitzgerald, who sang with Chick Webb, also projected a static release. In his hipst:
romantic picture of love. Ellington’s best love songs of the 1930s and 1940s X participated enthusiast:
conveyed the romantic potential of love (“I Got It Bad and That Ain’t ton’s Roseland State Ballr:
Good,” “I Can’t Believe That You’re in Love with Me,” “I Let a Song Go out the “styling out” that th:
of My Heart,” “Prelude to a Kiss”), but his rhythm section often lacked the jam-pack that ballroom. =
drive and the power to express building sexual tension. Over a steady shoes, their hair done in :
rhythm, however, with Basie at the helm, the shining train shot home as and crazy conks, and eve
dancers let loose their bodies, stomping in improvised flights of fancy.*° fueled the scene: “After “
The train imagery struck some of the deepest chords in African American full of empty fifth bottles-
experience. For blacks, trains connoted freedom through geographic mobil- cially Scotch.”**
ity, but they also had religious associations. Albert Murray says that it is After the liquor and t=
sometimes difficult to distinguish between a secular and a religious impulse into high gear. Dancing ~
behind the bell and whistle sounds, for spirituals and other religious songs era took black stepping *.
had urged life’s passengers to get on board the glory train. The blues also Savoy Ballroom for Bas‘z
utilized the “down home” imagery and beat of the train, while even earlier, wanted to come in thete :
the Underground Railroad had defined the road to freedom from slavery. ers and that audience.” ~
Although the original cultural impulse may have been religious, however, a white dance hall, stanz
in swing the implications were secular.*! who came in there to der
bands free reign. As Bas:
Do You Want to Jump, Children? Malsoln & Heise Hgts
way they did whatever <
During the swing era, black audiences participated in the music’s sense of chicks who came to Nez
freedom and exultation through the communal ritual of the dance. At bot- and racial restraints. “Scr
tom, the bands had to move the dancers or else they were considered wide, improvising steps 3:
second-rate. This rhythmic emphasis underlay a band as complex as Elling- feel the beat in my bors:
ton’s, whose “It Don’t Mean a Thing If It Ain’t Got That Swing” set out this on marijuana, “that wil.
principle, although his show band style made him less effective than Basie tions: “My long-suppress:
for dancers during the height of the swing craze. Yet after he hired Kansas cultural heritage was w-:
City saxophonist Ben Webster and bassist Jimmy Blanton (as well as the band was wailing,” he :
110 NOW THEY CALL IT SWING, 1935-1942
ae Te

--- Page 18 ---
“Dody [was] incomparable arranger Billy Strayhorn), Ellington caught up with the driv- |
<2 place of ing quality of other swing bands in his masterpieces of the late thirties and |
= all hope.” early forties, such as “Cottontail,” “Take the ‘A’ Train,” and “Ko Ko.” Chick
Webb, leader of the house band at the Savoy Ballroom, gloried in his ability
. > here you to work the dancers into a frenzy with “Stompin’ at the Savoy,” “Don’t Be
= Decome a That Way,” “In the Groove at the Grove,” “Undecided,” and others. Yet, the
: ndicated, most rhythmic bands came from the Southwest, where the 4/4 riff style |
sexual free- served as the organizing framework in the hands of the Blue Devils and
= with the then Count Basie.2?
~cined with It was through dance music, performed amid swirling bodies, that black )
iz Voices of bands performed their most important function—moving audiences to ec-
rrojected a static release. In his hipster days in Boston and Harlem, the young Malcolm
y dnd. 1940s X participated enthusiastically in the dance rituals of the swing era. At Bos-
snat Ain’t ton’s Roseland State Ballroom and Harlem’s Savoy Baliroom, Malcolm noted q
ing Go out the “styling out” that the oppressed enjoyed on their nights out: “They’d j
. -acked the jam-pack that ballroom, the black girls in way-out silk and satin dresses and
=: a steady shoes, their hair done in all kinds of styles, the men sharp in their zoot suits
7 dome as and crazy conks, and everybody grinning and greased and gassed.” Liquor
> ancy." fueled the scene: “After Negro dances, we would have to throw out cartons —
> American full of empty fifth bottles—not rotgut, either, but the best brands, and espe- |
= nic mobil- cially Scotch.”
vs that it is After the liquor and the band worked their influence, the dancers went
- 23 impulse into high gear. Dancing was a major source of cultural pride, and the swing
25 us songs era took black stepping to new heights. This was the appeal of playing the a
= alues also Savoy Ballroom for Basie: “All the top swing bands in the country really
=en earlier, wanted to come in there and see how they could make out with those danc- |
io slavery. ers and that audience.” At New York’s Roseland Ballroom, by comparison, |
s nowever, a white dance hall, standard steps were routine, but at the Savoy, “people |
who came in there to dance were out to swing,” and the management gave
bands free reign. As Basie said, “you felt that you were really at home.”
Malcolm X noted that “nobody in the world could have choreographed the |
way they did whatever they felt—just grabbing partners, even the white
.2 s sense of chicks who came to Negro dances.” This was a chance to let loose social q
x2. At bot- and racial restraints. “Some couples were so abandoned—flinging high and
:onsidered wide, improvising steps and movements that you couldn’t believe it. I could
ex as Elling- feel the beat in my bones, even though I had never danced.” In fact, high 1
sé: out this on marijuana, “that wild music wailing away,” Malcolm let go of his inhibi-
= nan Basie tions: “My long-suppressed African instincts broke through and loose.” This |
zed Kansas cultural heritage was women’s too. At Boston’s Roseland, as “the Count’s a
ell as the band was wailing,” he grabbed Mamie, an avid dancer. The “band was
NEWS FROM THE GREAT WIDE WORLD 111
} |

--- Page 19 ---
screaming when she kicked off her shoes and got barefooted and shouted, players would “be up 72272
and shook herself as if she were in some African jungle frenzy, and then the beat of all their rece >=:
she let loose with some dancing, shouting with every step, until the guy never had, anywhere, 2 £7::
that was out there with her nearly had to fight her to control her.” Freedom off to Harlem.*¢
in this instance was highly individual, enacted through the ecstasy of the In turn, big bandleaz=:-
body.*# width and breadth of 71: :s
The interaction between dancers and band reproduced the classic call mantic heroes. While cz. :
and response of the music, especially during the last hour of the dance— bands, these orchestras z.2
“showtime.” Then, Malcolm recalled, “a couple of dozen really wild couples African Americans creaz== -
would stay on the floor, the girls changing to low white sneakers.” The numerous “battles” to d=: x
band’s playing increased in intensity as the dancers took off. Those not whose classic elegance 2: =~
dancing formed “a clapping, shouting circle to watch that wild competition.” proper response to cha; ©
Everyone was part of the ritual. “The band, the spectators and the dancers clothes, he and his mer. ::
would be making the Roseland Ballroom feel like a big rocking ship. The Blessed with a deep-seats: :
spotlight would be turning, pink, yellow, green, and blue, picking up cou- beyond the humiliations :-
ples lindy-hopping as if they had gone mad.” Onlookers helped whip up of the Ellington Orches=:: :
the frenzy: “‘Wail, man, wail!’ people would be shouting at the band, and it of one-night stands plav=z
would be wailing, until first one and then another couple just ran out of visitors, “with their unit: —
strength and stumbled off toward the crowd, exhausted and soaked with horns, their flights of con>
sweat.” Swing encouraged improvisatory moves. When a musician soloed, art, their special sound. -:
dancers might make up a new step, which in turn encouraged the player. “They were news from thz =
As dancer Leon James recalled of trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie when he played els of success for black >:7~
with Teddy Hill in 1937, “We loved him. Every time he played a crazy lick, Ellison asked rhetorically ° ;
we cut a crazy step to go with it. And he dug us and blew even crazier stuff such as these? Who were ::
to see if we could dance to it, a kind of game, with the musicians and Who so skilled at their sz
dancers challenging each other.” placed in their paths with =
Ellington may have bee-
News from the Great Wide World conveyed urban style ane ~
ace Silver recalled wantin -
Vernon Jarrett and Ralph Ellison linked big band swing to the promise of ford band in Norwalk, C->>
the city, as one headed for Chicago, the other for Harlem. Such fascination vilion because of his colcr :.
was not limited to aspiring middle-class intellectuals. As a student in East attired musicians. “First <7 2
Lansing, Michigan, Malcolm X “had been hearing about how fabulous New they had white suits, and ==
York City was, especially Harlem.” From his father he had heard about Mar- ton felt that Cab Callows~:
cus Garvey, and in Joe Louis fight films he had seen Harlem Negroes cheer- and other Calloway music: 2:
ing in the streets. “Everything I’d ever heard about New York City was excit- it. Arrogant as all get out. 7>
ing—things like Broadway’s bright lights and the Savoy Ballroom and the be expensive. “The first thin;
Apollo Theater in Harlem, where great bands played and famous songs and ful of suits. I had to. It was
dance steps and Negro stars originated.” As a shoeshine boy at the Roseland you were suited down.” Ar =
State Ballroom in Boston, he had the chance to meet his many idols. Basie’s attire was not just so. “Perr
112 NOW THEY CALL IT SWING, 1935-1942
Nee ee ea

--- Page 20 ---
nad, players would “be up there in my chair, and my shine rag was popping to
mal the beat of all their records, spinning in my head.” He declared, “Musicians _
zuy never had, anywhere, a greater shoeshine boy fan than I was.” Soon he was
=m off to Harlem.*°
“je In turn, big bandleaders carried the aura of urban freedom across the
width and breadth of black America in their roles as mythic national ro-
call mantic heroes. While devoted white swing fans gravitated toward black
Ss bands, these orchestras played crucial roles within the black community. :
22S African Americans created their own royalty, whose orchestras engaged in
tgs numerous “battles” to decide which was the best. At the top was the Duke,
-ot whose classic elegance conveyed the message that self-possession was the /
or proper response to chaos and uncertainty. Dressed in tuxedos or evening a
27S clothes, he and his men showcased urban royalty wherever they toured.
The Blessed with a deep-seated sense of dignity, Ellington showed that he was
eH beyond the humiliations of segregation. Ralph Ellison paints a vivid picture
<p of the Ellington Orchestra’s visit to Oklahoma City, one of the “thousands
fit of one-night stands played in the black communities of the nation”: the
- 3f visitors, “with their uniforms, their sophistication, their skills; their golden |
th horns, their flights of controlled and disciplined fantasy; came with their
28, art, their special sound,” to relieve the landlocked town from its torpor. |
“Sr, “They were news from the great wide world, an example and a goal,” mod-
ed els of success for black boys and girls. “Where in the white community,”
ev Ellison asked rhetorically, “could there have been found images, examples
==tf such as these? Who were so worldly, so elegant, who so mockingly creative? |
ind Who so skilled at their given trade and who treated the social limitations
placed in their paths with greater disdain?”*’
Ellington may have been the apogee, but all bands, from Basie to Webb,
conveyed urban style and freedom through manner and dress. Pianist Hor-
ace Silver recalled wanting to be a musician after seeing the Jimmie Lunce-
=. af ford band in Norwalk, Connecticut, in 1938. Excluded from the dance pa- |
on vilion because of his color, Silver peered through the slats at the impeccably
st attired musicians. “First of all, they were dressed nice. Immaculate. I think |
eG they had white suits, and ties, and shiny shoes.” Similarly, bassist Milt Hin-
OE a ton felt that Cab Calloway’s band “was really something to see.” Hinton
oe a and other Calloway musicians were “the tops and we knew it and we acted
see it. Arrogant as all get out. The guys dressed to kill—all the time.” This could
ee be expensive. “The first thing I did was to take $600 and buy a whole closet- |
isd ful of suits. I had to. It was embarrassing traveling with those guys unless
4 you were suited down.” And many bands imposed penalties on those whose
aedy attire was not just so. “Perhaps,” remarked Hinton, Calloway intended to |
NEWS FROM THE GREAT WIDE WORLD 113
|
!
|
a
pee

--- Page 21 ---
show the black community “the sharp zoot suit, the hip styles, the new much closer to the average >.
lingo, and this kinda thing to elevate ’em.” His emphasis on proper behav- loway. The Amsterdam New:
ior and dress would demonstrate “the dignity of black people.” However, stock, having suffered, bux =::
Calloway’s disdain for the blues, his “Broadway” style, and the fact that he was made up of “young, ¢--~
played primarily for white audiences, even in the South, often alienated cians. “Excluded mostly ::: =
southern working-class blacks. This problem did not beset Basie. He was the Courier, “the Negro lezi:
more self-effacing, with “his usual unassuming manner,” as the Pittsburgh ments of other sorts.” Such
Courier said. He brought to this exalted fraternity a “simplicity and mod- one of the bands at the tcz
esty” that never set him above ordinary black people. As Dizzy Gillespie exhibited dedication, hari - -
said at his funeral in 1984, even at the pinnacle of success, Basie “still sat The bandleaders were -:. -
in the background. . . . He was the world’s greatest accompanist.”*8 pable of achievement in === -

Successful black bands also traveled in style—either by train or by more nobly or as constar=. =
streamlined Greyhound bus. Severely limited in where they could stay, how a set trend, he has createc =.
they could travel, and where they could eat, black bands in the South often a tradition for a world tc ::
had to devise strategies to outwit racial oppression. Cab Calloway and Duke leaders, he was considerza :
Ellington traveled in private Pullman cars in the South as a means of safety “truly a great man, great in 2
and a symbol of success. “It was always Pullman wherever he could get a Part of his achievement wz: >
Pullman, and a baggage car next to the Pullman,” Hinton said of Cab—“a on the musical horizon” :>.:
huge baggage car where he had a great big, green Lincoln Continental, and coming offered no outle: =).
he carried a chauffeur.” The luxury railroad car also gave musicians a place or otherwise.”4!
to bring women they met without conflicts with southern whites or blacks. As representatives of thz.: -
All in all, the elegance of the mode of travel of the top bands matched their munity assets, and they <:--
dress and their station.*® and charities. Many banés :-:

North as well as South, black musicians were figures of success. As vis- benefits for the Riverdale = --
iting royalty, Ellington and his cohorts represented what Ellison called “the performed for a variety cr >.
power of man to define himself against the ravages of time through artistic burgh Courier’s “All-Amer?cz-
style.” In the black community, especially during the depression, music and important swing cities pias.
its makers were harbingers of hope, “the stewards of our vaunted American to black charities. Basie 2::.:
optimism and guardians against the creeping irrationality which ever Louis, who did the granc=:-
plagues our form of society.” While the front pages of the black press were dollar title on the block fz: --
filled with dangers and horror during the 1930s and 1940s, the entertain- When black entertainer: :
ment and sports pages detailed with pride the accomplishments of black and when they succeeded => -
heroes and heroines. As Isadora Smith observed in The Pittsburgh Courier, nity. Indeed, the southerr. <-
“Because of Joe Louis, Henry Armstrong, John Henry Lewis and a collection tainers and celebrities shiz=:
of track and other stars of the sports world, the race today excels all in that blacks. Incidents of violer.z= :
field. As they go in such endeavors, so they run in the world of entertain- and their black fans but 27:: .
ment.” Her champions were many: Count Basie, Bill Robinson, Ethel Wa- their heroes and heroines. =:
ters, Ella Fitzgerald, all of whom gave black people pride of place in enter- tried to enter the segregates - |
tainment. Many of the newspaper profiles recognized the entertainers as tion of Lionel Hampton. +>:
Horatio Alger figures. This was especially the case with Basie, who seemed news, and so was Hamptcr : -
114. NOW THEY CALL IT SWING, 1935-1942

' — r
; “ee “ |
7 .t ia 7
7 a al '
i

--- Page 22 ---
mt much closer to the average black person than the elegant Ellington or Cal-
= loway. The Amsterdam News portrayed Count Basie as coming from poor ;
= stock, having suffered, but eager to get ahead, filled with ambition; his band |
ie was made up of “young, driving, conscientious and willing to learn” musi-
os cians. “Excluded mostly from politics, and suppressed in economics,” noted
2 the Courier, “the Negro leads the invention of music, dance and entertain-
: ments of other sorts.” Such was Basie, who was “working hard now to have |
-- one of the bands at the top.” Dispensers of pleasure, the top musicians also mm
= exhibited dedication, hard work, and sacrifice.*° ) |
io The bandleaders were living proof that black people were eminently ca-
pable of achievement in the fields open to them. Here “none have reigned )
f more nobly or as constantly as Duke Ellington. Where others have followed
-" a set trend, he has created,” according to Isadora Smith, “a new one setting
a a tradition for a world to follow.” Moreover, like many of the black band-
= leaders, he was considered a “trace man.” Smith, for example, found him
“truly a great man, great in deeds to a people and great in character to self,”
: Part of his achievement was his “setting the musical mind of the race apart
: on the musical horizon” and “opening fields to his people that before his
: coming offered no outlet to a race of great entertainment talent, musical
or otherwise.”*!
As representatives of their race, black bandleaders were considered com-
munity assets, and they contributed to numerous community endeavors
and charities. Many bands appeared, for instance, in the Apollo Theater’s
. benefits for the Riverdale Boys Foundation. Ellington, Basie, and Lunceford
performed for a variety of youth services. When the Count won the Pitts-
burgh Courier’s “All-American Band Poll” in 194] and 1942, he toured the
important swing cities playing “coronation dances” whose proceeds went
to black charities. Basie declared, the tour “will leave me feeling like Joe
Louis, who did the grandest American act in history, putting his million
dollar title on the block for the Navy Relief Society,”
When black entertainers suffered discrimination, it was page one news,
and when they succeeded their success was taken to heart by the commu-
nity. Indeed, the southern system of segregation ensured that black enter- |
tainers and celebrities shared a large measure of identity with southern
blacks. Incidents of violence and discrimination served to link black bands
and their black fans but also gave the fans an awareness of the dignity of
their heroes and heroines. Cab Calloway was beaten, for example, when he
tried to enter the segregated Pla-Mor Ballroom in Kansas City at the invita-
tion of Lionel Hampton, who was on the bandstand. This was front-page |
news, and so was Hampton’s decision to renege on his contract in protest.
NEWS FROM THE GREAT WIDE WORLD 115 |
|
|

--- Page 23 ---
Black newspapers trumpeted the fact that Duke Ellington was denied ac- cess to the presence of Tec
commodations in Moline, Illinois; that bandleader Don Albert was beaten of other white bands to ar
badly in Georgia; or that closer to home, the radio, movie, and band busi- Bandleaders and music
nesses continued to treat blacks as second-class citizens. Racist incidents sports figures of the day. \
increased during World War I. The underlying motif of these reports was Joe Louis. A symbol of ra
that black talent was being denied unfairly. The incidents served as a mea- came an American nation:
suring stick for use against white institutions, especially in music and enter- ling. Lawrence Levine has
tainment, where black achievements were clear. theon of black heroes in &:
On the other hand, every black “first” was an achievement for the race. is his importance to swing
When Ellington played Carnegie Hall for the first time in 1943, it was a swing music,” Louis serve:
major event, as was Basie’s breaking racial barriers at the Lincoln Hotel in fought Primo Carnera in *
Manhattan that same year. “The Count’s advent into the Lincoln Hotel will a head, crowded into the |
mark the first time that a colored band has ever appeared at the spot,” noted cended the boxing hieraz,
the Courier. “Still another first is the fact that this is the Basie aggregation’s musicians at the hotels w?
first hotel job in New York.” The black press also detailed Billie Holiday’s Mercer Ellington, Duke's :
stint with Artie Shaw in 1938 and Basie’s breaking awav from the Music business: great black fight<
Corporation of America to become “a free man.” Indeed, starting in the Ellington was, especially =.
late 1930s, black bandleaders and musicians began to display a new and Musicians also idolizec
increasing assertiveness. Basie, for example, refused to play Kansas City’s gloried in his victories ar.2
Municipal Auditorium, “his second home,” in protest over audience segre- Horne, who dated Louis, «
gation. As he put it, “if you don’t want my people, you don’t want my the radio. “I was near hv:
music.” Music had the power to overcome racial barriers and challenge re- being so badly beaten ar.<
strictions because of the musicians’ competence as artists. As Jack Gould Hinton had similar feeliz. =
declared of Basie, “If swing does nothing beyond lifting the Negro to his ing at the Fort Worth, Te2.:
proper stature ... it will have justified the agony it has caused the clas- to it on the radio.” For *
sicist.”° impetus to dignity, to mz:
As topflight entertainers, moreover, black musicians garnered praise from for us to say, ‘Hey, man |:
national and international sources and further contributed to black pride. musicians, Louis was 2 ™
Indeed, the Courier reprinted a New York Times article by Gould praising ‘hero’ in the black comm.
Basie and “the race” because swing demands “a high degree of musician- look up to you and rece =
ship,” and because improvisation “has been a distinct boon to the prestige worthwhile.” In addition
of the Negro musician who, with his inherent sense of rhythm to boot, has way I looked up to Paul = :
long been considered by the honest jazzman as the superior in the field of one out,] I’d say, ‘Hey . .
popular music.” Similarly, the paper noted Leopold Stokowski’s favorable of his prowess in the fie.=
views of “unknown Negro jazz bands,” as well as Hugues Panassié’s belief Basie also worshippec ~
in the superiority of black musicians over their white counterparts. But tion of John Hammone =
while praise from outside sources was welcome, the black press—as an ex- Wright and Paul Robes: >
tension of the black community—believed in its musical contributions to a black swinging blues =z:
America. Numerous articles confidently attributed Benny Goodman’s suc- between black sports ar:
116 NOW THEY CALL IT SWING, 1935-1942
a
nee

--- Page 24 ---
am cess to the presence of Teddy Wilson and Lionel Hampton and the success
oe of other white bands to arrangements by African Americans.
Si Bandleaders and musicians were also cultural heroes on a par with the |
aes sports figures of the day. No one stood higher than heavyweight champion
O35 Joe Louis. A symbol of racial self-assertion and democratic values, he be- |
23+ came an American national hero by defeating Nazi Germany’s Max Schme- ,
<r ling. Lawrence Levine has shown how quickly he was elevated to the pan- i
theon of black heroes in blues, folk songs, tales, and jokes. Less well known =
re. is his importance to swing and to black entertainers. As “a great patron of
3 swing music,” Louis served as a judge of the Courier’s Swing Poll. When he
= fought Primo Carnera in 1935, twenty thousand fans, at seventy-five cents
os a head, crowded into the Savoy Ballroom eager to greet him. When he as-
ts cended the boxing hierarchy he became a Harlemite and associated with
mS musicians at the hotels where they lived and the clubs where they played.
oS Mercer Ellington, Duke’s son, noted the relationship of sports and show a
sc business: great black fighters like Louis “would always come wherever Duke —
ne Ellington was, especially to the Cotton Club.’”*5
fe Musicians also idolized Louis as a symbol of their own aspirations. They
vs gloried in his victories and suffered deeply when he lost to Schmeling. Lena j
ee Horne, who dated Louis, was devastated as she listened to the match over
a the radio. “I was near hysteria toward the end of the fight when he was
Ss being so badly beaten and some of the men in the band were crying.” Milt
2c Hinton had similar feelings when he heard the results. The band was play-
Lis ing at the Fort Worth, Texas, World’s Fair. “They wouldn’t even let us listen
Se to it on the radio.” For Hinton, it was a major loss. “Cause [he] was an
impetus to dignity, to manhood, to us. He was a symbol. It was a chance
s for us to say, ‘Hey, man, look out. Don’t do that. Here we are.’” Like band
2 musicians, Louis was a hero to blacks. As Dizzy Gillespie put it, “To be a
= ‘hero’ in the black community, all you have to do is make the white folks |
pe look up to you and recognize the fact that you’ve contributed something
ze worthwhile.” In addition, “black people appreciate my playing in the same
35 way I looked up to Paul Robeson or to Joe Louis. [When Joe knocked some- |
7 one out,] I’d say, ‘Hey .. . ! and felt like I’d scored a knockout. Just because |
‘é of his prowess in the field and because he’s black like me.’”*¢
a: Basie also worshipped Louis. He put his feelings on record. At the instiga-
ao tion of John Hammond, Basie recorded “King Joe” with lyrics by Richard j
e- Wright and Paul Robeson on vocals. Uniting black and white leftists with q
CS a black swinging blues band, the recording immortalized the connections |
<- between black sports and music heroes. According to Louis’s biographer,
NEWS FROM THE GREAT WIDE WORLD 117 _
!

--- Page 25 ---
aS renewed optimism, h:: = =.
— a blues and the dignity :: ~--
, a bution to black cultu:: - =
; ee i = A helped transform easzez7. v7
ae = _ ws ' befitting this era of tr: . t
oe Ye “A — ence brought to the 52-77=
= ey Ve oS Bee 3 4 Whether an Ellingtor. ~ -
i. L fe . = r #, music or a Basie whe HS ws
y «. >a cody mins, RB
ee... — ae sant aoa
Hoge Ee ne = : ! its
iB; oe Pen ae black music was the 77-7 2
: eS. Te 2 are wa iu that swing was Amerizi- —.
Po oe a ae > ‘ served to be heard bv » > -=
ae Be ae oe oie bay 2s . ment of swing. For raci::. 7
Pees Se eA - American society and 2 > »:
The “King Joe” session. In a tribute to Joe Louis, Richard Wright, Paul Robeson and Basie collabo- eT ae 2
rated in a recording with John Hammond (not pictured), 1941. This Popular Front endeavor to swing left.
brought together white and black leftists and creative artists to promote black cultural pride.
Frank Driggs Collection.
the song was a tribute to black culture: “Black eye peas ask corn bread /
What makes you so strong? / Corn bread says I come from / Where Joe
Louis was born.” Each of the participants in the recording had an important
role to play in the fight for racial advancement and solidarity. Each bore
. testament to the breaking of cultural barriers, and each was a hero to the
race. In sports, politics, and the arts, a racial self-awareness was building to
the political awakening that followed World War II. Duke Ellington, on one
hand, expanded the range of black music, and in Jump for Joy, his 1941
musical, he challenged “Uncle Tom” racial stereotypes and looked to a new
day for black Americans. Count Basie, on the other hand, extended vernac-
ular music and expressed the dignity of the average black person. Together
they touched a growing sense of pride and impatience.”
During the depression, black vernacular entertainment was revitalized.
While many blacks suffered during the depression, entertainers held out
hope that life was better in northern cities. Indeed, migration from the
South continued throughout the decade and exploded with the war. This
118 NOW THEY CALL IT SWING, 1935-1942
-

--- Page 26 ---
|
renewed optimism, however, increasingly was rooted in the reality of the
blues and the dignity of the common black person. This was Basie’s contri- _
bution to black culture in the late 1930s and the 1940s. Just as his music
helped transform eastern swing into an earthier working-class blues sound :
befitting this era of the “common man,” so too his dignified yet hip pres-
ence brought to the pantheon of national black bandleaders a figure with
whom the average black person, northern or southern, could identify.
Whether an Ellington who demonstrated the high art possibilities of the |
music or a Basie who showed vernacular music’s artistic power, the black |
swing musician created cultural solidarity around music, asserted that the 1
black community could survive adversity, and declared that it was an inte-
gral part of the American landscape. In these ways, black swing figured in
the resurgent energies of the New Deal era.
Moreover, radicals in the jazz world willingly advanced the notion that |
black music was the American contribution to art. The growing awareness
that swing was American music—and that its players, black and white, de-
served to be heard by whites and blacks equally—was a part of the excite-
ment of swing. For radicals the music acted as a standard by which to judge
American society and a model for how it might become truly democratic.
To understand the direct links between politics, race, and culture we need
to swing left.
|
I
|
I
NEWS FROM THE GREAT WIDE WORLD 119 |
|
