--- Page 1 ---
I 2003
Berry Gordy Jr. and the
Original “Black Label”
by Larry Schweikart
sked to identify prominent people in including Billie Holiday and T-Bone Walker,
the music industry, most Americans and the club owner managed a young singer
will name musicians. A few may men- named Jackie Wilson. Gordy was invited to
tion Phil Spector, Herb Alpert, Burt write some songs for Wilson, and he collab-
Bachrach, or Quincy Jones—producers, orated with Roquel “Billy” Davis to pen the
writers, and arrangers, not (essentially) per- hit “Lonely Teardrops.”
formers. A true “music geek” may even Gordy soon met Raynoma Liles, who
name behind-the-scenes music gurus such as auditioned for backup singer in some of the
Clive Davis (founder of Arista Records) or acts Gordy had begun to produce. Raynoma
Ahmet Ertegun (founder of Atlantic (whom Gordy married) could write music,
Records). Yet few musicians, songwriters, or and this talent fit perfectly with Gordy’s own
performers have had as much impact on the freelancing songwriting style. In 1957 he
American music industry as Berry Gordy Jr., produced “Reet Petite,” also sung by Wil-
founder of the original “black label,” son, bringing still more ambitious acts to
Motown Records.! His is an illustrative Gordy’s doorstep. When a group called the
chapter in story of American entrepreneur- “Matadors” was turned down by Wilson’s
ship. manager, Gordy took it under his wing,
Gordy loved the music business and changing its name to the “Miracles” and
dreamt of writing and producing. A former spotlighting its lead singer, William
Golden Gloves boxer, he was drafted during “Smokey” Robinson. Gordy was now wear-
the Korean War, and when he returned to ing three hats, as manager, writer, and pro-
his native Detroit, he started Gordy’s 3-D ducer for the Miracles. He produced their
Record Mart to sell jazz records. But the minor hit “Got a Job” (an answer to the Sil-
store floundered: his customers wanted soul houettes’ “Get a Job”) and the success of the
and blues. In 1955, after only two years, Miracles, along with the songs Gordy wrote
Gordy folded the business and took a job at for Jackie Wilson, convinced him that he
Ford Motor Company’s Lincoln division. could make the leap to the next level: own-
But he had not given up his dream. He got ing his own record label. In 1959, using
his break when a concession business run by $500 that his mother lent to him, Gordy
his family at the Flame Show Bar introduced formed Tamla Records and a publishing
him to several top entertainers. The Flame arm, Jobete Publishing. This was a signifi-
Show featured the top black acts in Detroit, cant move, because as any musician knows,
the lion’s share of the royalties goes to the
Larry Schweikart (schweikart@erinet.com) teaches publisher and writer, not the performer.
history at the University of Dayton. Gordy continued to write hits, including
40

--- Page 2 ---
, have shocked Gordy. Their songs “Heat
Wave” and “Dancin’ in the Streets” shot to
the top of the charts.
| ow Gordy realized, however, that blacks con-
a stituted only about 12 percent of the popu-
al] lation in the United States, and even if he
, = . sold a record to every black adult, he could
J not make as much money as if he sold to
Ee a ' ry. only one-quarter of the white population.
ee He therefore embarked on a risky and, in
Le . retrospect, brilliant strategy to “package”
- = black Detroit acts in such a way that white
7 ; audiences would buy their records. This was
se no mean feat. It could have backfired with
ss his large black audiences, giving him a repu-
ar | tation for selling out. On the other hand, he
gi faced a substantial hurdle in getting black
| ; j ; 5
ii artists on mainstream radio. Only a few
j # years earlier, a white singer from Tupelo,
a | Mississippi, Elvis Presley, had been denied
—— airplay on some radio stations because he
feck oka “sounded black.” But Gordy realized that
cultural differences had to be bridged from
“Money (That’s What I Want),” recorded by both directions. If whites were to embrace
Barrett Strong. But finding that his little the less rigid structure of black rhythm and
label could not efficiently distribute the blues, the music had to be presented in a pol-
records around the country, he signed a_ ished, sophisticated (and non-threatening)
national production and distribution deal way. In short, Gordy’s genius was that he
with United Artists. In 1960, Gordy con- presented black music in the entertainment
verted the Tamla and Hitsville USA record — structure that white audiences were familiar,
labels into a new company, “Motown,” and comfortable, with.
from Detroit’s “Motor Town” nickname.
wr the advice of Smokey Robinson, Breaks New Ground
otown began to distribute its own records
that year, bolstered by the success of Robin- Gordy hired a choreographer, for exam-
son and the Miracles’ “Shop Around.” By ple, to teach the groups how to move.
that time Detroit-based black talent started Motown choreography, which eventually
to beat on Gordy’s door with regularity, and became a caricature of itself, nevertheless in
the artists produced by Motown started to _ its early years broke new ground in musical
gain acceptance in wider markets. Mary presentation. He also realized that his
Wells, for example, achieved “crossover” singers, most of whom were from poor
into white markets with the classic “My inner-city neighborhoods, needed to be able
Guy” (1964). to make a good showing in interviews to bet-
Some stars were literally right under ter promote their records. He hired elocution
Gordy’s nose. His secretary, Martha Reeves, instructors and taught the artists proper
had a group called the “Vandellas,” and she English and social skills. Gordy dressed his
successfully lobbied Gordy to record the acts in suits, tuxedos, or full dresses. If
group. After proving their mettle by singing racists were going to complain that black
backup on a few Motown hits, “Martha and music would pervert the nation’s youth, they
the Vandellas” was allowed to record solo, would have a hard time proving it by look-
with results that, by that time, should not ing at the Motown stable of groups, whose
41

--- Page 3 ---
Ideas on Liberty « May 2003
members were well-dressed, articulate, and ram EeeEy ==" Ee
polished. This was more than a superficial i
remake. “We don’t accept an artist easily,” pe). ee sl
Gordy told a Detroit newspaper. “We look "ij [aa Say
for character and integrity as well as talent, _ ‘we —
and this produces a big family-type organi- aes ‘eee
zation.” ral SI 7 he a
Gordy demanded of his acts hard work, a_ | al ae -
straight life, and commitment to “the sys- ee A a as
tem,” and in return he recognized that he eC if
owed them sound financial advice so they 4 Fie.
would not squander their money. Setting : ie
up a financial-counseling service, Gordy |[ 2 f Wy ee
explained in 1962, “We try to help artists F ey 5 2 A hag
personally with their investment programs uj gro — sat Wy
so that they don’t wind up broke. We are Poo mpgs - ey i Ave
a fil We are Rims | MEE
very much concerned with the artist’s wel- i) a aayF ay hte
fare.”2 ot 5 | Hitter |
San pve!
Perhaps Gordy’s most impressive barrier- ei Ea Pl 6
breaking move was not his formatted chore- [aasAs | nts a he oa
ography or his “packaging” of black acts, | ay | aus me
but his fundamental assault on the construc- Rage he ie | i Bede 7
tion of black blues itself. Knowing that [ia ®™ rh Ei... i ine
traditional blues, as played by Muddy “~** "=== "==s . reer nl tal ge erty i
Waters, Blind Lemon Jefferson, and B. B. ¥ bs Fede 5
King would be a hard sell to white audi-_ , * Ps cents E
ences, Gordy worked with Eddie Holland, © LER a es Baers i
Lamont Dozier, and Brian Holland (known 2 = i a Jeo Tene 3
as “Holland-Dozier-Holland” on the record Berry Gordy Oe
labels) to transform the traditional 12-bar
blues and 32-bar ballads into new, short
strains that featured a repeated “hook,” or Knight and the Pips had left Motown after a
catch phrase. The innovation can be heardin huge hit, redoing Marvin Gaye’s “I Heard It
the Supremes’ hit “Stop, in the Name of Through the Grapevine.”
Love” and others. Motown suffered with the loss of artists
Gordy’s Motown Records cranked out and songwriters, and it fell into a two-year
many hits in the early-to-mid-1960s from funk while Gordy struggled to find replace-
the Temptations, the Supremes, Martha and ments. He found renewed life with a new
the Vandellas, and the Four Tops, always band, the Jackson 5, who submitted to
keeping the records within a two- to two- Gordy’s “polishing” process in Los Angeles.
and-a-half-minute time frame so that disc After a year of preparation, the Jackson 5
jockeys would play them. released “I Want You Back,” featuring the
Like other artists, Holland, Dozier, and powerful and dynamic vocals of the
Holland flourished in Gordy’s Motown sys- youngest member of the family, Michael
tem, and yet they came to resent his control. Jackson. Gordy realized that Michael had
The songwriters broke off in 1967 to form _ the strongest fan appeal, and during the time
their own label. While they still produced a that the Jackson 5 continued to turn out the
few minor hits, they never enjoyed the suc- hits, Gordy groomed Michael for a solo
cess they had at Motown—perhaps due in career.
part to changes in musical taste by that time. Gordy was correct in his assessment of
They were not the first to leave: Gladys Michael Jackson, but as had occurred with
42

--- Page 4 ---
Berry Gordy Jr. and the Original “Black Label”
other Motown stars and songwriters, his locked into a formula for groups, producing
tight grip alienated Michael and the group. the Commodores, but the heyday of its
In 1976 the Jackson 5 left Motown, renam- creativity was gone, and further erosions
ing themselves the Jacksons, and not long of black dance music occurred when the
after that, Michael Jackson changed the face “disco” scene made several white acts, such
of music history with his stunning albums, as the Bee Gees and K. C. and the Sunshine
“Off the Wall” and “Thriller” (which was Band, into dance-music stars.
co-produced with Quincy Jones). Given the In 1988 Gordy sold Motown to MCA
Gordy formula, it is unlikely Jackson ever Records. He had literally changed the Amer-
would have created many of his masterpieces ican music industry, introducing large num-
had he remained at Motown. But like so bers of suburban whites to “black” music
many others, including young Steveland Jud- and advancing the careers of many who now
kins (whom Gordy repackaged as “Little are honored in the Rock and Roll Hall of
Stevie Wonder”), Michael Jackson owed his Fame, as is Gordy himself. Gordy became a
start to Gordy’s genius. victim of his own success, and like Henry

Ford, the revolutionary finally turned into
Top Black-Owned Business the old guard. But weep not for Berry Gordy

Jr. In the process of creating Motown

By the early 1970s, when Black Enterprise records, he became wealthy, started an
magazine labeled Motown the top black- empire, and gave America some of its best
owned business in America, Gordy had relo- music moments. OC
cated many of his operations to Los Angeles. 71 aa oa ede, ES er
As he involved himself less in daily matters, Callahan, “The Motown Story,” online at www.bsnpubs.com/
Motown’s hit-making reputation suffered.  $tvaorrimls "Sweet Soul Mons Thats Wawro
But with or without Gordy, Motown found — the 20th Century (Irvine, Calif.: Entrepreneur Press, 2000),
that music itself had changed, developing a 29157 an Lary Scar The Enron der
harder edge with the 1970s rock bands and Harcourt, 2000), pp. 398-99.
the advent of the drug culture’s psychedelic 7 Ker Berar Merry Gods Jeers Rcd King
and “metal” music. Motown remained  motownat40/archives/122662mo.htm.

43
