--- Page 1 ---
——— otown
A Whiter Shade of Black
JON LANDAU
Diana Ross and The Supremes, Stevie Wonder, Smokey Robinson and the Miracles—Motown’s famed
roster virtually defined the height of pop sophistication in the 1960s. Modeling his label’s sound on
the successful assembly-line production of Detroit's Ford Motor Company, Berry Gordy (born 1929)
fashioned a durable hit single formula. The songwriting team of Eddie Holland (born 1939), Lamont
Dozier (born 1941), and Brian Holland (born 1941) provided a host of memorable melodies, the
Funk Brothers contributed their propulsive rhythm section arrangements, and soulful singers like
Levi Stubbs of The Four Tops added their voice and image. The author of “A Whiter Shade of Black,”
music journalist Jon Landau, would later go on to greater fame in the 1970s as Bruce Springsteen’s
manager and producer. In this 1967 article, originally published in Crawdaddy! magazine, Landau
examines the Motown style as a form of musical crossover designed to appeal equally to white and
black audiences. Like many other observers, he also contrasts Motown with the more “hard core”
sounds of the Stax-Volt label. Landau identifies many of Motown’s most characteristic elements,
from song forms to details of instrumentation. What he outlines is nothing less than a formula for
success, and one whose features have been replicated throughout rock’s history, from the 1970s
Philadelphia soul explosion to the various hip-hop, dance, and pop production teams that have
dominated popular music in the 2000s.
Traditionally there have been three types of Negro musicians in pop music. The first consists of
artists who for either aesthetic or financial reasons have chosen to sever their ties with specifically
S Negro music and instead work in the general field of pop. Richie Havens, as an exponent of the
2 contemporary urban ballad in the Ochs-Dylan-Paxton tradition, and Jimi Hendrix, as an exponent
4 of freaking out, are good examples. The second class consists of performers who are still working
® in one of the basic Negro musical forms but who seek to alter their approach enough to make it
< appealing to a large part of the white audience. Motown is the ideal example, but someone like Lou
3 Rawls also falls into this category. Finally there is the hard core: performers who won't or can’t
2 assimilate, and therefore just continue to do their thing. If the white audience digs what a performer
5 in this group is doing, it’s just gravy; the performer never expected it. This category contains all of
e the independent R&B labels, most importantly the Stax-Volt group in Memphis, Tennessee.
= Obviously the first group identified above is irrelevant in a discussion of Negro music because
< performers in this group are working in musical idioms which are not distinctively Negro. Motown,
8 as the basic representative of the second group, seeks a white audience but maintains a basically
= Negro identity, and is a logical starting point for any survey of Negro pop.
& 67
Cateforis, T. (Ed.). (2012). The rock history reader. Taylor & Francis Group.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-07-25 20:05:46.

--- Page 2 ---
68 THE ROCK HISTORY READER

Motown is two things above all. It is a place and a form. By the first I mean that it is a community,
obviously tightly knit, made up of a group of people all aiming at the same thing. By the second I
mean that the music that this community makes is stylized to express precisely what Motown wants
it to by use of recurring techniques, patterns, and other devices. In the evolution of Motown the
community clearly came first, and a brief look at how Motown began will help us clarify what the
Motown form is, and why it takes the form that it does.

When Motown began is not altogether clear. Legend has it that Berry Gordy, Jr., the man who
runs the place, quit a job on a Detroit assembly line nine or ten years ago, borrowed some money,
and began his rise to success instantly. The history of Motown shows us that it was not all that
simple. It is a fact that almost a decade ago Berry Gordy was already in the music business writing
for one of the greatest of all Motown performers, although he has never recorded on a Motown
label, Jackie Wilson. (Wilson, who was clearly a major influence on Smokey Robinson, has always
recorded for Brunswick.) The first records that Gordy produced for his own labels were written by
himself, starting around 1960, perhaps earlier. Two of the earliest Motown tunes were Barrett Strong’s
“Money” and the Contours’ “Do You Love Me?” Both of these songs seem remarkably
unsophisticated compared to what the typical Motown song-writing team of today throws out, even
for flip-side material. Both of these records were in fact indistinguishable from the general R&B of
the day. “Do You Love Me?”—the later of the two—even has the old-fashioned twist drumming, a
rarity on the oldest of Motown records.

It appears that the first major move Gordy made in his attempt to build Motown was to bring
William “Smokey” Robinson into the picture. At first Gordy collaborated with Smokey in writing
tunes for Smokey’s legendary Miracles. After four or five duds, their joint labors resulted in the
spectacular “Shop Around.” This was one of the early big ones for the Motown organization and it
was not only a financial success but an aesthetic one, with Robinson’s faultless lead earmarking the
Miracles as something far above the rank and file of R&B vocalists.

Smokey gradually moved up in the organization. But while he was struggling to make a name
for the Miracles, other talent was being brought into the picture. Mary Wells, Marvin Gaye, the
Marvelettes, Little Stevie Wonder, and the Supremes were all gradually added to the roster. When
back-up vocalists were needed for records by big stars, a former Motown secretary named Martha
Reeves organized a trio—Martha and the Vandellas. Motown soul records with big booming
commercial arrangements were making it into the pop charts. Marvin Gaye put two straight blues,
“Wonderful One” and “Can I Get a Witness,” right up there, and a little twelve-year-old kid named
Stevie Wonder sold a million copies of one of the freakiest Motown records ever, “Fingertips,
Pt. II.” The community was clearly developing at breakneck speed in the early sixties, but there was
still no form. Individual successes were common but they were not based on any specific Motown

< style. Motown was still just an electric grouping of artists not readily distinguishable from the rest
2 of souldom except by virtue of the fact that they generally did what they did better than anyone else
é around.
> The Motown form came in 1963-64, with the advent of the Supremes. During the pre-Supremes
= era a Motown vocalist named Eddie Holland had been occasionally releasing singles, mostly poor
8 imitations of Jackie Wilson. Over a period of time he, Brian Holland, and Lamont Dozier formed
a a song-writing-and-producing team. They had their first significant opportunities to develop their
& style with Martha and the Vandellas, and they wrote and produced many of the girls’ early hits:
s “Come and Get These Memories,” “Quicksand,” “Livewire,” and “Heatwave.”
= Apparently the Vandellas could only go so far. Martha has a straight, tough, soul voice and probably
2 was not the right type for the more commercial records being planned. So attention was soon turned
@ to the Supremes. The one advantage Diana Ross had over Martha, on a record, was her cooling
= sexy voice. This was coupled with the consummated Holland-Dozier-Holland writing-producing
é

Cateforis, T. (Ed.). (2012). The rock history reader. Taylor & Francis Group.

Created from ucdavis on 2022-07-25 20:05:46.

--- Page 3 ---
MOTOWN 69
concept, and the result, after a few failures, was fantastic financial success. There can be no doubt
that “Where Did Our Love Go” and the follow-up, “Baby Love,” set the direction for the future of
Motown. With these two records, H-D-H and the Supremes had created the Motown definition
of success. Each of these records was the product of a carefully thought out, highly distinctive
musical form that had been a long time in coming. When the formula paid off, Motown lost no
time in refining the form, stylizing it, and imposing it on all of their artists, one way or another.

What then is this Motown style? It is a distinctive approach to all facets of record making,
especially rhythm, melody, instrumental sound, and vocal arranging. With regard to rhythm the
most important thing is Motown drumming. Up until the time of H-D-H the most common pattern
of drumming was for the drummer to hit the snare on the second and fourth beats of every measure.
That was changed to the drummer hitting the snare on every beat. While this aspect of the style
was not present on the earliest H-D-H productions, with the Vandellas and the Supremes, it soon
became a Motown staple to the point where it would be safe to say that seventy-five percent of the
records recorded in a Motown studio since “Baby Love” have this style of drumming. In addition,
over a period of time production techniques were developed to give added emphasis to the drums,
and to give them a distinctive sound. Tambourines were added on some records and in general
anything that would deepen or solidify the effect of the beat was thrown in. The Motown beat was
to become the key to public identification of the Motown sound.

Motown changed things around melodically as well. Prior to the Supremes there were two basic
pop music forms: the blues form and the ballad form. Motown changed all that. Repetition was the
new order. “Baby Love” is a circle of repetition. Its form is very close to a-a-a-a. Motown writers
were among the first to realize that they were writing for the car radio and they learned early in the
game to keep it simple. By and large the songwriting chores were turned over to a select number
of teams such as H-D-H or the team of Stevenson-Gaye (“Dancing in the Streets”), all of whom
stuck to the basic credo of keeping the melodic structure relatively simple and easy to follow.
However, it must be added that within easy-to-follow melodic structures Motown has often produced
melodies and chord progressions of surprising sophistication for a pop song.

Perhaps the part of a Motown record that is easiest to recognize is the overall instrumental
background. In addition to the distinctive beat, already discussed, Motown has always presented
the public with highly regimented, stiff, impersonal back-up bands. Even the solos so common on
Motown singles are totally lacking in spontaneity. It’s easy to see where the charge of black Muzak
comes from. Of course this approach succeeds commercially because it keeps things simple,
predictable and danceable, and besides, lots of the basic arrangements are pretty. (Like on “Stop in
the Name of Love.”)

Equally as important as the instrumental back-up style is the vocal back-up. Here Martha and
< the Vandellas can take full credit for stylizing the pattern of beginning sentences with high-pitched
e “Ooh’s” and ending them with “di-doo-doo wah’s” You can hear them do it perfectly on Marvin
é Gaye’s “Stubborn Kind of Fellow” or throughout their own Dance Party album.
> Such is the fourfold path to the Motown sound. However one other thing not strictly a part of
= the musical form must be mentioned. It is the Motown approach to the lead vocal. I haven’t
8 included this as one of the basic characteristics of the Motown sound because I feel there is too
2 great a variation among the Motown lead vocalists and because I don’t believe vocals can be stylized
5 in the same way that other aspects of pop music can.

s In discussing Motown vocals the first thing to realize is that Berry Gordy, Jr., knows that you
= can give a singer everything, but if the guy can’t sing he won't sell any records. Therefore Motown
s makes damn sure that everybody who they sign has the basic raw material. Motown takes these
° vocalists and of course tries to give them a style. But most of the successful Motown artists have
2 retained a strong degree of individual identity.
é

Cateforis, T. (Ed.). (2012). The rock history reader. Taylor & Francis Group.

Created from ucdavis on 2022-07-25 20:05:46.

--- Page 4 ---
70 THE ROCK HISTORY READER

Within the context of many individual vocal styles, two basic approaches can be identified. One
is symbolized by Diana Ross (of the Supremes), one of the most successful vocalists of all time.
Diana’s approach is to stick closely to the form. She rarely steps out on her own, seldom improvises,
and never gets in the way. She restrains herself so as to fit perfectly into the prerecorded instrumental
tracks that she dubs her voice into. Consequently she is the least jarring of Motown vocalists, the
least disturbing, and the most able to reach a car-radio audience. I wouldn’t deny for a second that
she has a fantastic voice for what she is doing, that she oozes sex, and that she is a fine vocalist. But
she seldom goes beyond what was planned for her by the production team.

The other type of Motown vocalist is seen in Levi Stubbs (lead singer of the Four Tops). His
thing is breaking through the barrier that the regimented background sticks him with. All his
shouting, his frenzy, his individuality, is something that Motown can’t quite control or make
predictable. He is an artist who can be told what to say only within certain limitations—once within
them he is on his own and there is no telling what he will do. The dichotomy between Levi’s style
and Diana’s is simply this: Diana strives for unity whereas Levi creates conflict. Diana’s approach
is to roll with the given version of the Motown sound she is to record. She will try to fit snuggly
into the overall framework. A very commercial, good record will then be produced, but one without
much artistic merit because it contains no tension. It becomes too smooth. The best example of this
is Diana’s performance on “You Can’t Hurry Love.” The alternative to this approach is Levi’s method
of attacking the song, and in the process creating his own dynamic. Levi's style is based on creating
tension between the lead vocal and everything else that happens on the record. It is the same dynamic
that Stevie Wonder creates when he sings “Uptight,” and that David Ruffin creates when he sings
“Pm Losing You.” When the artist chooses this path the record as a whole improves because the
background and the beat no longer have to stand on their own but can act as counterweights to the
vocal. And when a record is created in which all the different parts are interacting in this fashion
then the listener is suddenly able to appreciate individual excellence on the part of the musicians
as well as the vocalists, and you may find yourself digging the fantastic thing the bass is doing on
“Bernadette,” or the fact that the drummer is socking it to you on “Uptight.” This is Motown at its
finest.

Having gone this far in identifying a Motown style, it should be noted that things do not remain
pat or static within the context of the basic sound. Refinements are constantly taking place and
there are always some limited forms of experimentation going on. For example, Smokey’s “Tracks
of My Tears,” one of the classic Motown lyrics, also was notable for the un-Motown-like use it made
of the guitars. The Four Tops have been doing songs which have clearly been influenced by the
Dylanesque technique of incessant repetition, as Richard Goldstein correctly noted some time ago.
However, one thing Motown will never do is go against the grain of its highest value—success. It

< may dabble here and there in electric variations on its style, but if these variations don’t sell records,
2 forget it. Smokey Robinson’s activities as songwriter and producer have recently been curtailed,
4 presumably for that reason.
> Of course, since the Supremes era began, success has never really been in question at Motown.
= They have the style and they have the talent, and by God, they sell the records. But success means
8 many things to many people, and here is the rub. The head of the Motown corporation picked up
a some pretty perverse notions as to what constitutes success, somewhere along the line. It hasn't
& been enough to just break out of the soul charts and radio stations. It hasn’t been enough to outsell
s the top pop stars in every field. Berry Gordy’s idea of success is to be able to put each one of his
= groups into the big nightclub scene. As I write this the Temptations are at the Copa wowing them
2 with “Swanee,” according to the latest issue of Variety. As a result of this philosophy Motown has
@ weighed down its artists with absurd album material (Would you believe the Four Tops singing
2 “Strangers in the Night” on their On Broadway album?) and absurd live nightclub acts. There is no
é

Cateforis, T. (Ed.). (2012). The rock history reader. Taylor & Francis Group.

Created from ucdavis on 2022-07-25 20:05:46.

--- Page 5 ---
MOTOWN 71
sense in laboring the point, because things are going to get worse before they get better. But it should
be pointed out that such a policy may put big Motown stars into high-paying clubs but lose them
some of their hard-core, record-buying audience in the process.

It has been suggested that Berry Gordy’s experience as an auto worker in Detroit before his
entrance into the music business has given him too rigid an idea of how to run a record company,
and it is certainly true that he likes to run things in assembly-line-like fashion. The Temptations
are going to do the Copa bit because that is what Motown stars are expected to do when they reach
a certain level of success. And the fact that David Ruffin doesn’t sound good singing “The Best
Things in Life Are Free” isn’t going to keep him from doing it.

This rigidity in management is particularly evident in the Motown album approach. Motown
policy here is not hip to the concept being developed by the big pop stars that an album is a whole
thing, not just your latest hits and some junk. As a result the best Motown albums are in the “Greatest
Hits” series, because such albums at least retain the uniform high quality of Motown singles. They
also sell quite well. The best of these is The Temptations’ Greatest Hits. Only a few Motown albums
outside this series are listenable. Dance Party is certainly one of these, but I don’t know how many
others could be named. This is a quick-money policy based on the concept that a few hits will sell
an album. But as the Doors and the Airplane have recently proven, an album which builds up a
reputation of being good unto itself doesn’t need big hits on it to sell. Both Surrealistic Pillow and
The Doors sold extremely well before any of the album cuts made it as singles. And Sgt. Pepper
doesn’t have any singles on it at all.

In general, Motown must base its reputation on singles. “Reach Out I'll Be There” is certainly
the best record the Four Tops ever made and probably the best record ever produced at Motown.
There are simply no flaws. No dumb instrumentals. A beautiful lyric and a very sophisticated chorus.
Perfect tension between artist and orchestra. Fantastic use of verbal repetitions in the vocal back-
up. It’s a record that cuts through, that transcends all the limitations of the recorded rock form. In
my opinion if there is any one thing that makes the difference on this record it is the power and
absolute conviction of all four vocalists. When Levi sings you know he is not kidding. His voice
literally drives that band through the floor of the record ... And the rest of the Tops push even
Levi that one step further with their perfectly timed responses to him, and their “Aahs” at the
beginning of each verse.

As manufacturers of single records Motown is unparalleled in both artistic and financial success.
From the Supremes on there has always been an abundance of first-rate Motown records. “Shotgun,”
“Ooh, Baby, Baby,” “Heatwave,” “Ain’t That Peculiar,” “Tracks of My Tears,” “Baby I Need Your
Loving,” “Uptight,” “Dancing in the Streets”: it’s positively remarkable what this company has
achieved within the limited form they have chosen to produce their music in. And in the last year

< important steps have been made to broaden that form. Increased virtuosity, particularly of the rhythm
2 instrumentalists, is being featured. The level of songwriting for singles is fantastically high. (Just off
é the charts: “I Was Made to Love Her,” “Ain’t No Mountain High Enough,” and “More Love.”) New
> production people are being added who are doing good things, like Harvey Faqua.
= The night before I started this article I saw Stevie Wonder on Joey Bishop’s late-night show. He
8 performed “Alfie,” which I think is a decent song, on the harmonica. As they were introducing him
ie I got upset thinking to myself that this was going to be dreadful. Stevie played it beautifully; he
& really did. And that—right there—showed me the power, the freedom the artist has to transcend
s the ephemeral, like the particular song he is playing, or the particular band he is working with. And
= after writing all this if I had to say what makes Motown work, when it does work, I would say it is
2 the combination of the limitations that are imposed on Motown’s artists, and their capacity, which
° manifests itself only occasionally, to shatter them with some little nuance that no one could have
2 predicted. Motown is the transcendence of Levi saying “Just look over your shoulder.” And the
é

Cateforis, T. (Ed.). (2012). The rock history reader. Taylor & Francis Group.

Created from ucdavis on 2022-07-25 20:05:46.

--- Page 6 ---
72 THE ROCK HISTORY READER

beautiful thing is that the way Levi says that—that could never be formalized or stylized. The beauty
of Motown is that it gives great artists something to work with and against. It gives them salable
good songs and a beat and a producer and musicians and supervisors. But it doesn’t give its vocalists
their voices, their talent, or their soul. When Smokey sings “This is no fiction, this is no act, it’s
real, it’s fact,” or when Stevie sings “No one is better than I/ And I know I'm just an average guy,”
we are no longer listening to a thing called Motown. We are participating in the transcendence of
a particular artist, we are drawn into an individual vision of reality. From every aesthetical point of
view possible it can truly be said that when these moments occur there is no longer Motown, but
only music.
Source: Jon Landau, “A Whiter Shade of Black,” Crawdaddy!, October 1967. Reprinted in Jonathan
Eisen, ed., The Age of Rock: Sounds of the American Cultural Revolution (New York: Vintage Books,
1969), pp. 298-306.

8

2

z

a

8

oO

5

w

oS

5

=

oi

R

2

Oo

Cateforis, T. (Ed.). (2012). The rock history reader. Taylor & Francis Group.
Created from ucdavis on 2022-07-25 20:05:46.
