--- Page 1 ---
.
i
f it
\
|
|
: CHAPTER 5 :
| Ragtime _
Ingeb ,
geborg Harer | |
H| H
; 4 :
;
i
i |
i NTRODUCTION ;
The earliest application of the term “rag” occurred in Ernest Hogan’s j |
“All Coons Look Alike to Me” (1896), a Song associated with black- q |
race minstrelsy. However, ragtime came into existence long before 4 |
che music was given a name. Its period of widespread popular- 4 |
:ty spanned the years from about 1896 to 1920. Ragtime actually 2
started as a way of playing, a departure from the written scores or §
pre-existing melodies, By the end of the 1890s, the term defined a 4 )
performance style and Practices applied to composing and playing 7 :
popular song, dance, and instrumental music. But even during the a |
ragtime era there was an uncertainty about the meaning of ragtime. a /
Historically, ragtime was variously conceived as song, dance, and 4 |
syncopated instrumental music, even though the Majority of sheet — Coon song q
music available today is for piano, Popular song f
As part of the general marketing scheme, instrumental and vocal Sey le of the late E |
ragtime, cakewalk, and “coon Songs” became synonymous in the Nineteenth ‘ee i.
public mind. Coon songs, typically performed by Whites (often in early twentieth a
blackface) and Blacks in minstrel shows, portrayed denigrating and ely that q
stereotypical lyrics sung in Negro dialect. African Americans were stmeoupat s
depicted as lazy, dishonest, violent, greedy, sexually promiscuous view of African q |
thieves and watermelon eaters. Minstrel performers who sang these Americans, often 4 :
songs also danced to the thythms, basing their movements on the performed by i
African-derived plantation dances of slaves, frequently described as White singers in 3 7
“grotesque” by White observers. blackface, 3
@
|
=
127 4 !

--- Page 2 ---
IOS
—_S_
Calcawatk Other slave dances such as the cakewalk were derived from those eee
A dance that of slave masters. The cakewalk is described as a parody of the White vag’ Serese cs
parodies White upper-class behavior: dignified walking, bowing low, waving canes, ong muived auth Zu
upper-class doffing hats, and a high-kicking grand promenade. The setung for asmei tees as erste
behavior, this dance was intrinsically competitive; according to ragtime scholar isidusltieces if
originally _ Edward Berlin, “the slave couple performing the most attractive steps wing wages ie BI
performed by and motions would ‘take the cake.” 1 Following its exhibition at the ~Fegecine, “TS HEE
African American 1893 World’s Fair in Chicago and a competition at Madison Square “> suncopateatune
slaves; the best Garden, the audience for the cakewalk increased to mass proportions. ses, Rhythmic <=
penformeanee From the late 1890s through the first decade of the twentieth century, -asseation were
Was.aNva? 3 a the cakewalk became one of the most popular dances on the vaude- seesosirion—een
rize, usually a : ; : kB oie
P ke , from A h ville stage and in the ballrooms of the United States and Europe.’ sg Sree derade f
ake, from whic . cata Ut ge #3
the deane takes The terms cakewalk and ragtime appeared at approximately the e~anal tedkaizce
et . . ; i
bee Neeaiich same time in the printed medium, although—to be exact— Ophelia --sation and mare
Cakewalk” was published as early as 1892. Titles and subtitles of ~s5h's “Russian F
pieces, therefore, do not accurately differentiate the music. For Ze-4maninofr” 2
commercial reasons, the titles “Cakewalk,” “March,” “Two Step,” -:se4 on Liszt's =
“Rag,” and others were printed simultaneously on the title pages ~. Colby’s “Misex
of the music. A piece called “cakewalk” or “tag” could therefore be *->m ‘Il Trovatore
either, in terms of the actual character of the music. The images on. The concec: -
sheet music covers often portrayed the lyrics or characters described “:-ming pushes fo
in the text, varying from “neutral” images of flowers and trees to ~emey’s Ragtin: |
portraits of African Americans with big lips and bulging eyes danc- =ag was conceive:
ing or eating watermelons. The latter images strongly reinforced ex- -zz: rather it prev
isting stereotypes attractive to publishers and buyers as symbols of zs ragtime. For Be
“authenticity” intended to support the perception that the music “= 5lin, Joseph Lez
was indeed African American.’ --atin and his fo.
The turn of the century witnessed the emergence of a new kind > playing “in rag:
of syncopated instrumental music. Later known as jazz, this music zadually develon;
became popular in brothels and saloons and on the vaudeville stage. :
During these transitional years initiating the jazz age, the terms > RIGINS OF RAC
“ragtime” and “jazz” were used synonymously, as were the verbs oo,
m5 BD « oy . . ; > 2gtime was crea:
jazzing” and “ragging. Ragtime is therefore more than an aside oe
; ; ems ? . :; cvasicians, many
in the pre-history of jazz; 1€ 1s actually an inseparable part of it, as Girst deve’
: ; ' sats First deve.
evident in the names of two early New Orleans jazz bands: Buddy 4 ea
; : : ccnotated new =
Bolden’s Ragtime Band and Jack Laine’s Ragtime Band. Moreover, :
« » 3 3 : : : eS where Blacx
the term “rag” is used in the titles of the first jazz recordings by Civil War.
1s i . ; --2 Civil War. T=:
the Original Dixieland Jazz Band in 1917, including “Tiger Rag,” sl
7-2 player-comp:
“Sensational Rag,” and “Reisenweber Rag.” ; pe - i
Be itp . : . ws. the visitors |
The term “ragtime” remains somewhat elusive despite many
ee ded >2tes who worke:
attempts to explain tt; 1C 1s used both as a noun and as a verb. As a
-— ; ; :nhere were sever:
noun, it identifies a particular type of music. Recent research links
Ean atin it . . riinment busine
the noun “rag” to handkerchief-flaunting in nineteenth-century folk ith fee
; ) ind the musica. ;
dancing.” In that case, “rag” is a synonym for handkerchief.* Another 7 “
wo men az
usage of the noun appears in 1899, when Rupert Hughes observed —— —
cone first to pud.
128 African American Music 2 satime
if a! :

--- Page 3 ---
I
_
il
|
that “the negroes call their clog-dancing, ‘tagging’ and the dance a '
‘tag.””® Although it becomes clear here that original African dancing
was mixed with European (Irish) clog dancing, this source may be |
considered as key to the naming of the dance and music. After all, the |
individual pieces of music were called “rags” rather than “ragtime.”? |
“To rag,” asa verb, directs attention to the performative emphasis Rag or ragging
of ragtime. “To rag”—as many contemporary sources contend—means The term applied /
to syncopatea tune; ragging meant embellishing and decoratingmelo- to syncopated
dies. Rhythmic effects, particularly the shifting of accents (knownas or embellished
syncopation) were the main characteristics of ragging a tune. Any melodies during j |
composition—songs, hymns, marches—could be Playedinragtime.In the ragtime era.
the first decade of the twentieth century, tagging became a compo- i '
sitional technique applied to classical music, which resulted in the 4
creation and marketing of many new works, for example: George L. 7
Cobb’s “Russian Rag, Interpolating the World Famous ‘Prelude’ by i |
Rachmaninoff” ( 1918); Julius Lenzberg’s “Hungarian Rag” (1913),
based on Liszt’s Hungarian Rhapsody No. 2 for Piano; or Carleton 4 :
L. Colby’s “Misery Rag. A Ragtime Travesty on the Famous “Miserere’ |
from ‘Il Trovatore” (19 14). 4 |
The concept of “ragging” preceded composed ragtime. Trans- /
forming music into a rag is not the same as composing a rag. Ben {
Harney’s Ragtime Instructor gives us an idea of how the “art” of rag- |
ging was conceived. Published in Chicago in 1897, it contains no real j .
tag; rather it provides instruction on how to play traditional tunes
as ragtime. For Ben Harney ragtime was a “way of playing”: for Scott q
Joplin, Joseph Lamb, and Eubie Blake it was also a way of writing. 1
Joplin and his followers realized that the musical concepts applied 1 |
in playing “in ragtime” could be used in original compositions. They | |
gradually developed a sophisticated style of composing ragtime. q
5 {I
ORIGINS OF RAGTIME j
Ragtime was created and popularized by itinerant African American a
musicians, many of whom did not read or write music. These musi- I
cians first developed ragtime as a playing style, disseminating this ‘
unnotated new music in brothels, saloons, bars, and other similar q
sites where Blacks found their first performing opportunities after q
; the Civil War. The first audiences of ragtime, therefore, consisted of q
. the player-composers themselves, the owners of the bars and broth- q
els, the visitors (presumably affluent White men), and the prosti- ‘
‘ tutes who worked there. Apart from these venues of low reputation, q
f there were several other contexts within the contemporary enter- q
j tainment business where ragtime was featured, such as vaudeville i
t and the musical theater,’ § z
i Two men are credited as “father of ragtime” because they were { '
: the first to publish their ragtime compositions. In January 1897, ‘
: q
i ‘
, Ragtime 129 a
a
ern

--- Page 4 ---
William Krell, a White bandmaster, published his “Mississippi became increa
Rag.” This piece of music, subtitled “The First Rag-Time Two-Step published in ¢:
Ever Written” and first played by Krell’s Orchestra, was actually not expectations ©
a rag but a cakewalk. Several other similar pieces corresponding to
the musical features of cakewalk rather than ragtime, but called RAGTIME AS :
“rag time,” followed, including Warren Beebe’s “Rag Time March” As naetheneens:
and R. J. Hamilton’s “The Rag Time Patrol.” In 1897, the first rag- indigenous co.
time manual was issued: Ben Harney’s Ragtime Instructor. Harney'® ced . .
claimed to be the inventor of the new style: his manual concentrates music £0 PY
ae : : a reduction o:
on describing and teaching the practice of ragging a tune. The first 2m ite written -
piano rag was published in October 1897: Theodore H. Northrup’s ey of plinatrms .
“Louisiana Rag Two-Step.” It contained, for the first time, several herent in “k
types of syncopation, thus utilizing the rhythmic characteristic that Laden Amet!.
most defines ragtime. Finally, Tom Turpin’s “Harlem Rag,” the first sranch of the -
rag written by an African American composer, followed in December Althouck :
1897. Turpin published a total of five rags during his lifetime. His ~eanta very -
“Harlem Rag” is not only considered the first authentic rag pub- *t sation of hae
lished, but it is also special because it is the first composition within ee =
. - A sf i.iagee observe
the genre that actually depicts the transition from oral tradition °
to printed music. Because Turpin’s composition was derived from The naming ;
actual performance, the musical practice, to some degree, became in the trans
visible in the printed medium and could be adopted by others. In ragtime hav
addition to defining the playing technique, Turpin revealed the through tis
melodic, harmonic, and rhythmic structures of ragtime within an did not rea.
overall musical form. “fstealie
This chronology might be misleading with regard to the actual | ragtime é
emergence of ragtime as a distinct musical type. Many Blacks played ir printed s°
ragtime before Krell’s Orchestra added ragtime to its repertoire. tcchentic oric:
Moreover, African American pianists did not initially consider trans- “sate of tha =
lating their compositions for sale in print. Performing the music _cs rags that s.
was financially attractive, because piano players in bars and saloons ee
received tips. It was much more complicated to publish a rag, and so molar Mle we
for African Americans it was generally more difficult to receive gt leat tay om
acknowledgement and payment in the publishing industry.'' Some é son lan
of them—for instance, Louis Chauvin—chose not to publish their sie Horelon
compositions, because they had established reputations as perform- ---cugh the “3
ers rather than composers. J alin azo
When ragtime shifted from oral to written tradition, it became + meme gear ura
known beyond its initial limited audience. The publishing of a8 re won
ragtime did not stop the improvised tradition, which continued 1 we aes a
to coexist and varied depending on who was playing (professionals i soe Bloewe a
or amateurs) and where (geographically and socioculturally) the nym eel eg
specific playing style had evolved. The translation of playing styles emg gps wwe
into the printed medium resulted in quite different products as | saetseetin =e
soon as White musicians wrote down what they thought they had i, hee Bod
heard. As the music developed and became more elaborate, playing *,2 “hee be
130 African American Music owe
amy ae Em : 7 — _ 7 _— ~ pi oH

--- Page 5 ---
a
j
became increasingly difficult. Thus, simplified versions of tags were !
published in the second decade of the twentieth century to meet the |
expectations of amateur players. j :
RAGTIME AS PRINTED MUSIC |
As ragtime emerged from the culture of Black communities, leaving its i
indigenous contexts meant a gradual change from an orally transmit- { ‘I
ted music to printed sheet music. Transcribing, in many cases, meant |
a reduction of what was originally played; once notated, the music |
In its written form automatically concealed the variety and flexibil- |
ity of playing styles as well as the improvisational moment originally
inherent in the music. And it was often Whites who transcribed what q |
African Americans played. Consequently, a commercially successfy] 4 |
branch of the publishing business evolved. q
Although transcriptions of ragtime performances definitely Transcription 4 |
meant a very superficial] translation to the printed medium, the pub- The process of 4
lication of ragtime, nevertheless, had a significant impact, as Jeffrey notating musical ’
Magee observes: Performance. 4
The naming and printing of ragtime in the latter 1890s marks a crucial stage 4 |
in the transformation of the music and made Possible its broad impact on 4 |
American culture. On one hand...the Syncopated patterns that distinguish ‘4
tagtime have their roots in African musical Practices that came to America a
through the slave trade. On the other hand, there is a sense in which ragtime a
did nor teally exist until ir was named and marketed as such, !2 |
Musically, we might consider these representatives of popular- 4
ized ragtime as translations of originally African American idioms q
into printed sheet music. These versions deviated widely from their 3
authentic origins but ironically became subject to the demands and 4
needs of the majority of White middle- and upper-class Piano play- d
ers: rags that sounded good and were fasy to play became bestsellers. q
Many of the White composer-arrangers producing these rags were 4 |
employed by the publishing companies and did not have to search for 4 |
publication Opportunities. q !
Scott Joplin and his followers who had learned to read and write q |
‘ music developed skills that enabled them to create new impulses ql
5 through the written medium. The sophisticated compositional style 4 |
i of ragtime developed and cultivated by Joplin, James Scott, and White . . 4
f composer Joseph Lamb for Piano came to be called “classic ragtime,” Classic ragtime 4 |
one reason why ragtime today is often exclusively associated with Notared 4
Or written a
} the piano, ; ; ; : compositions E
Most Americans became acquainted with ragtime only after for piano, in 4
i‘ it appeared as Printed music, which is why many authors describe four sections; a |
fagtime as “composed” music, with little emphasis on ragtime as associated 4 :
a performance art. Usually a ragtime piece was published in small with Scott a |
numbers and sold a few dozen (sometimes a hundred) copies in the Joplin and his ‘ |
area where it was published, However, “Maple Leaf Rag” ( 1899) was contemporaries, 4
a i
Ragtime 131 " |
ee eee

--- Page 6 ---
the exception to this rule. The publication of “Maple Leaf Rag” and megotia’
its tremendous success greatly increased Joplin’s visibility and in- Sept we
: fluence as well as that of publisher John Stark. Among all publish-
ers Stark was the only one who committed himself to specializing S=RFO>
in ragtime, which he promoted in announcements and in his cata-
logues. Previously, rags had only been listed as “new” on sheet music, oo
and very often nothing else was done to enhance sales. Stark believed FIECKKCe
: in ragtime and actively committed himself to advocating the value of STen ET
| , ragtime as American music. STeserce
| When Stark initially published “Maple Leaf Rag,” Joplin received =-8 Sua
Royalties one penny per copy in royalties. By 1905, Stark was selling 3,000 fo me FS
Payment made copies a month and “Maple Leaf Rag” had become the most popular nag DOT
by a music and best-selling rag of all time. The incredible success of “Maple Leaf oo
publisher to a Rag”—a half-million copies were sold by 1909—inspired other music MOAT
composer based publishers to produce hundreds of rags. 030« 2c
| of the pumber Joplin assisted other ragtime pianists in publishing their compo- “Ire S
of printed copies . 5 . : : 5 cee nee
sold. Also sitions after his reputation as ragtime composer was well established. aie
, He recommended James Scott to Stark, who at Joplin’s insistence “ee a
payments made : a,
by record labels issued Scott’s “Frog Legs Rag” in 1906. It was to become Stark’s SUSE
to artists based second best-selling rag, and he went on to publish 24 additional rags PuEiD 5a5
on the number by Scott. Joplin also suggested Marshall’s “Lily Queen” to Joseph W. SNES.
of records sold. Stern Company in New York, which had published works by Blacks 2 Enron
since the 1890s. It usually took some time for composers to get a tag 7 ma
published; this was true for White as well as for Black composers. TE Late:
Networks among composer-colleagues that existed across ethnic ai5im
groups were also helpful in the publishing process. Joplin supported OTT
White composer Joseph Lamb after having been introduced to Lamb’s fick.
composition “Sensation” at Stark’s publishing company. At Joplin’s ATTTED
request, Stark published “Sensation” in 1909, yet Joplin’s name was oP ad
imprinted on the title page in order to promote sales. Altogether, To HDLS
Lamb published 12 rags with Stark. 5 2 S05
Although the majority of popular rags seem to have been writ- avort
ten and published by White composer-arrangers, the question of “7 Tab.
whether this was an exploitation of the African American origina- TET
tors of the music cannot be answered simply. Current perspectives 3 SEnT
and definitions of “exploitation” differ greatly from those that were ar
prevalent during the ragtime era. Standards for royalties and copy- PRE S
right did not apply to African Americans during this time period. It “2 CAEL:
is obvious that African Americans were the originators of ragtime "0s .TES.
but did not reap commensurate benefits from their accomplish- tie,
ments. Scott Joplin serves as a classic example: although Joplin had eo aTe
a royalty contract with publisher John Stark for “Maple Leaf Rag,” 6 ats
this arrangement did not apply to all of Joplin’s compositions. In Tl
1909, Stark informed Joplin that he would not pay him royalties Sie:
on any new compositions. Consequently, Joplin’s last rags were Wet
published by Seminary Music. Like Joplin, each composer had to tl
132 African American Music oo

--- Page 7 ---
/
|
negotiate royalties with publishing companies and often had to ac- | |
cept low rates, if granted any at al]. |
PERFORMING RAGTIME P|
Ernest Hogan’s 1896 “A]] Coons Look Alike to Me” documents the
Practice of highlighting the melody in ragtime. An optional arrange- i
ment of the song’s chorus, titled “Choice Chorus, with Negro ‘Rag” is |
presented on the last Page of the sheet music and offers a rag version
for piano arranged by Max Hoffmann. In this version, the right hand
of the piano score plays the melody of the song in ragtime, whereas /
the complete accompaniment is performed by the left hand.
Tom Turpin is the first major composer of tags; he was also well |
known as an excellent performer, Turpin lived in St. Louis from q
1887, and in the early 1890s he began his career as saloon pianist 4 |
in one of the most notorious sporting houses of St. Louis. In 1897, 4
the year he published “Harlem Rag,” Turpin opened his own busi- q |
ness, Turpin’s Saloon, Three years later, in 1900, he opened the j |
famous Rosebud Bar, the site where many ragtime pianists started :
their career. The Rosebud Bar consisted of several rooms: batrooms, j
dining rooms, gambling rooms, and hotel fooms. Turpin played the q
Piano in the wine room, where an upright piano was placed on wood- ]
en blocks so he could play while standing up. Tom Turpin fostered 4
the careers of other Black Piano players by enabling them to play q
and compose ragtime for his Rosebud Café (as Turpin’s bar was also 4
known). Among these Promising pianists were Scott Hayden, Arthur {
Marshall, Joe Jordan, Louis Chauvin, Charlie Thompson, and Artie 7 |
Matthews. They later gained reputations as ragtime figures, primar- q
ily of the Midwest, who developed their own individual styles. At his A
Rosebud Bar/Café, Turpin organized Piano contests for the younger q
players who waited for a chance to earn their living as musicians. q
Many of the young men established their career at Turpin’s bar and 4 |
eventually left St. Louis.'5 Turpin closed his bar in 1906, and in 1910 ‘
he opened the Eureka Club, where Arthur Marshall, Joplin’s former q |
student, became the house Pianist. q
Although Joplin was not the most outstanding ragtime Plano j
player, he nonetheless formulated concrete guidelines for play- 1
ing ragtime, particularly his own music. For his rag “Leola” (1905), 4
he established playing rules that were printed on the sheet music: q
“Notice! Don’t Play this piece fast. It is never right to play ‘rag-time’ '
fast. Author.” Three years later, in 1908, he wrote his School of Ragtime, q
Six exercises for amateur Pianists. His guidelines for performance 1
warned against “careless playing,” which could be viewed as eccen- a
tric performance Practice. Clearly, Pioneering African American 4 a
composer~-performers acknowledged the existence of boundaries in i |
the performance of ragtime. 4 !
Ragtime 133 =
OEE

--- Page 8 ---
_ Louis Chauvin, called the “King of Ragtime Players,” was known his opera Treemonis
as the best pianist performing in St. Louis. He won the ragtime con- published it himse!
test held during the St. Louis World’s Fair in 1904 and was said to in education as the
play completely from memory, unable to read musical notes. Sam achieve progress—is
Patterson describes Louis Chauvin’s playing: succeed in putting |

When he would first sit down he always played the same Sousa march to David A. Jasen and |
limber up his fingers, but it was his own arrangement with double-time pr oducers might ha:
contrary motion in octaves like trombones and trumpets all up and down. ;
the keyboard... Turpin was great, bue Chauvin could do things that Turpin White producers di:
couldn’t touch. He had speed fingering and he tossed octaves overhead.’° black writer, simpy
producers, preferri=
The art of improvisation was central to the ragtime tradition as work that depicted :
~ described by jazz pianist-composer James P. Johnson, who performed [where the opera is :
3 : § a : » doubts. Treemonis?-.:
Cutting contest In many ragtime “cutting contests : .
inf | make it.?°
v es : I played rags very accurately and brilliantly—running chromatic octaves and :
competition glissandos up and down with both hands. It made a terrific effect. I did double America was not rez
among glissandos straight and backhand, glissandos in sixths and double tremo- and low classes, WIC!
CEMSECERIIEY los. a would run other ticklers out of the place at cutting sessions. They Many of the rag
intended to wouldn’t play after me. I would put these tricks in on the breaks and I could Patt hei Te
identify the artist think ofa trick a minute. I was playing a lot of piano then, traveling around Srlime was Tair .=
with the greatest and listening to every good player I could. I'd steal their breaks and style and composers were mut
ie ractice them until I had them perfect.” apart fro ia:
creativity P P r from these pia:
‘ . dlaying rag iy te
and skill. Tom Turpin, however, is perhaps the best example of a performer- pee SABRINA It Le
- ‘ : to the status of Ame:
composer, whose compositions show clear traces of his own impro- . he b
. . 5 rom. t a a-
visatory style. As a composer, Turpin thought like a performer, and ved z tothels “
ceived o :
“Harlem Rag,” more than any other early rag, shows the amateur 5 nee ne. Ge
; . , : 3ecause of his prod:
player how to put excitement into ragtime playing. Instead of the “The King of
: z e KI im.
usual repeat-as-written markings at the ends of themes, “Harlem” ns . Ragtim
‘ : 5 . i 21S VISIO 1
provides written-out repeats of its second, third, and fourth strains, eq on: Ray canis
Gf ae . _ of “classi Bie
each of which is trickier—and showier—than the original statement . a iegeae &
tar is
of the melody.’® 4 mowed his
. : : order to >
Among the representatives of “classic ragtime,” James Scott was f at BSE
. ; . . cransferr :
probably the best piano player. His style of playing at approximately _ sain pies
. Zominate ro
the age of 15 was described as such: ; ea
rejected and distance:
He sat at the keyboard with his left leg wrapped around a leg of the stool or Zan Alley publishers.
bench and bounced up and down with the beat as he played, his short square _¥ . :
fingers literally flying over the keys as he attempted to squeeze the greatest =2. repertoire playec :
possible number of notes into the space of each beat. While thus occupied, he 2 chose to call his -
was lost to the world and the sordid environment around him, totally absorbed scribing the qualit:
; = word: i ig? “oo :
with the wonder of his music. siassical music. Sta:
CUAGEIE BAGTINAE z2vocated for the exe:
a kT zemre. At the same ti
During his lifetime, Scott Joplin participated in the classical musical “zcial connotations. 7
tradition as both performer and composer. As a young man he was “i rags by eliminatins
trained in the field of classical music, which is probably the basis for his ~:s sheet music covers
preoccupation with this genre. Joplin composed several works for the -=2r names of plants <
theater and concert stages. His symphonies are lost, however, as is the -2zeping Willow’), -
score of his opera A Guest of Honor. Joplin was unsuccessful in getting 2 mcopations,” 1902:
134 African American Music “ine

--- Page 9 ---
|
a i
his opera Treemonisha published by any established firm; he finally |
published it himself in 1911. Scott Joplin’s great vision—his belief
in education as the most important means for African Americans to |
achieve progress—is the main topic in this opera. Yet, Joplin did not }
succeed in putting Treemonisha on Stage in spite of sincere attempts. |
David A. Jasen and Gene Jones speculate that Black as well as White | /
producers might have rejected this work for various reasons:
White producers dismissed out of hand the idea of an opera-length work bya 4 |
black writer, simply because there was no commetcial precedent for it. Black j
producers, preferring to show the progress of their race, would not stagea q
work that depicted the low estate of their people in Reconstruction Arkansas i
[where the opera is set]. Even the devotees of Joplin’s rags would have had their i :
doubts. Treemonisha is not a “ragtime opera;” it is as high-class as Joplin could ’ q
make it.?° 3
]
America was not ready yet for music without boundaries, for high ; /
and low classes, written and performed by African Americans.
Many of the ragtime pioneers were itinerant pianists for whom q
ragtime was their livelihood. It is evident that the ragtime player- | |
composers were mutually influenced in their activities. Joplin stands 4 |
apart from these pianists, because in the long run he himself gave up 1 |
playing ragtime in favor of composing. He sought to elevate ragtime { |
to the status of American art music and envisioned a music removed fF /
from the brothels and performed on the concert stage. Joplin con- q /
ceived of ragtime as composed music, not merely a performed idiom. q |
Because of his prodigious output, his contemporaries dubbed him q
“The King of Ragtime Writers.” Joplin’s publisher, John Stark, shared 1 /
his vision of ragtime as an American art form. He articulated his view ‘
of “classic ragtime” in advertisements and brochures. 5
Stark moved his company from Sedalia to St. Louis in 1900 in q
order to be closer to the most active music scene. When he finally 4 |
transferred his office to New York, he found a musical scene that was { |
dominated by the commercial aims of Tin Pan Alley publishing. Stark 4 |
rejected and distanced himself from the commercial standards of Tin a
Pan Alley publishers. He equated ragtime with the standard classi- 1 |
cal repertoire played in the homes of amateur musicians. Therefore, q
he chose to call his company “The House of Classic Rags” and, in q
describing the qualities of ragtime, he established links to European §
classical music. Stark was a prolific advertiser and persistently q
advocated for the excellence of “classic ragtime” as a distinct musical q |
genre. At the same time, he sought to free ragtime from its negative 1
racial connotations. To this end, Stark transformed the marketing q
of rags by eliminating stereotypical images of African Americans on j |
his sheet music covers. For example, the ragtime pieces he published q
bear names of plants and trees (J oplin’s “Sun Flower Slow Drag” and |
“Weeping Willow”), or they refer to beauty or style (Joplin’s “Elite q |
Syncopations,” 1902; and James Scott’s “Grace and Beauty,” 1909). '
q |
. _
Ragtime 135 :

--- Page 10 ---
Elegant young ladies playing the piano appear on many covers, no have been eit
doubt identifying the music’s potential clientele. on ragtime. E
tributed to ra
WOMEN IN RAGTIME appears tu the
Sheet music publishing became a highly profitable industry at the
beginning of the twentieth century, and ragtime was part of this com- RAGTIME IN
mercial success. Playing the piano became very popular for amateurs, African Amer
particularly for young White women, a fact that prompted piano singers from 1
sales, as well as sheet music sales, among middle-class families. Being ragtime was :
able to play the piano and to sight-read became qualities that were to as it reached E
be useful for new jobs in music publishing-related industries. Sales no “vocabula:
clerks were employed in music shops and department stores to intro- described whz
duce customers to the newly published music for piano. Professional classical musi
pianists and musicians were needed to transpose and arrange songs radically fron
for professional performers, silent film accompaniments, and piano music and its
roll recordings. These new jobs were sometimes held by White women, “grotesque,”
as the piano was the most popular instrument to be played by women critiques, whi!
throughout the nineteenth century. In fact, learning to play the pia- newspaper co:
no became a “trademark” of the typical middle-class education for of performan.
girls. Considering the young women as “consumers” of ragtime, sheet eccentrics Bla.
music publishers targeted this group.
White women obviously were fascinated by ragtime, thus they Cakewalk
were also tempted to start composing, usually as a hobby rather By the end of t
than for public recognition. The few amateur composers that pub- ragtime, seer
lished their own compositions often used a pseudonym or initials, American mu:
hiding their identities. Most ragtime women were in their twenties ~enced fewer |
when they composed rags, and many of them discontinued their zast (and nort
musical activities after marriage.?' Still, a representative number end St. Peters
of the approximately 300 ragtime women composers appear to cakewalk as z
have contributed to the history of the genre.” Adaline Shepherd’s -mitated by E
(1883-1950) “Pickles and Peppers” (1906) became very popular. >2came partic
Irene M. Giblin (1888-1974), who worked as sales clerk introducing cluding in bs
new sheet music to customers in department stores in St. Louis, pub- zontained cakz
lished nine rags. Pauline Alpert (1900-1988), a vaudeville perform- >ne of the x
er, reached fame as a pianist, recording as many as 90 piano rolls for rezaption of ¢:
the piano roll company Duo-Art. Her piano playing was reportedly erticle printed
enthusiastic and fast. May Frances Aufderheide (1890-1972) grew ine impact of :
up in Indianapolis and was supported by her father, who opened vires of cakew:
a publishing company to promote her ragtime compositions.” The exar:
Aufderheide’s “Dusty Rag” (1908) and “The Thriller” (1909) became 22's that cake
very popular beyond Indianapolis. According to ragtime author Rudi “ther writers -
Blesh, her rags were performed by the early New Orleans jazz bands.”* -=+ dance cal’:
Aufderheide assisted in the publication efforts of other women --« cakewalk --
such as Gladis Yelvington (1891-1957) and Julia Lee Niebergall -tondence oF 2
(1886-1968) by convincing her father to publish their ragtime com- > ble strurce-
positions. Despite the achievements of these and other women, they -~2 Austrian cz
136 African American Music ig te
ve oe = a _

--- Page 11 ---
a
have been either glossed over or totally omitted from the scholarship /
on ragtime. Even though African American women undoubtedly con-
tributed to ragtime as performers and composers, such information
“PPears to be nonexistent in the literature. 1
RAGTIME IN EUROPE 4 i
African American artists appeared in Europe as itinerant musician-—
singers from the eighteenth century onwards. As in the United States, j
ragtime was received with enthusiasm as well as with dismay as soon |
as tt reached Europe around 1900. Because this new musical form had q i
no “vocabulary” that observers or Ctitics could use, White audiences ; !
described what they saw and heard in the same language they used for |
classical music, Because the repertoire and performance Style differed ’ {
radically from the established European canon, African American ; :
Music and its performers were typically labeled “exotic,” “eccentric,” q
“grotesque,” or “comical.” The Visual impression dominated the q |
critiques, while the quality of the music itself was often ignored. Local 4
newspaper commentaries frequently underscored the fun character d /
of performances, using such telling headlines as “Original musical ] |
eccentrics Black & White.»25 3 :
Cakewalk 4 !
By the end of the nineteenth century, the cakewalk dance, rather than q f
ragtime, seemed to have Captivated European audiences. African ]
American musicians frequently arrived in London, where they expe- 3 !
rienced fewer language barriers and from where they traveled further 4
east (and north) as far as Paris, Berlin, Hamburg, Vienna, Budapest, ‘
and St. Petersburg.’ While vatious American duos performed the ]
cakewalk as a special attraction on vaudeville stages, it was also q
imitated by European performers and composers. The cakewalk q
became particularly Popular on various European theater stages, q
including in ballets and operettas, Composer Franz Lehar’s operettas q |
contained cakewalks, which were also printed as Plano sheet music.27 q |
One of the most important sources of information regarding the q
reception of the cakewalk in the German-speaking countries is an «
article printed in the Illustrierte Zeitung Leipzig in 1903.28 [t describes { |
the impact of the cakewalk in Europe in great detail, including Pic- 3
tures of cakewalks on plantations and in ballrooms,” 4 |
The examination of theater, varieté, and circus Programs re- 4g
veals that cakewalk dancing was also introduced in Vienna in 1903.30 ——
Other writers in the local papers of middle Europe also tefer to the q
new dance called the cakewalk. Even the New York Times reports about 4
| the cakewalk in Vienna: “If the Prognostication of the Paris corre- 3 7
i spondence of Die Zeit of Vienna comes true, the emphatic steps and 4
‘ nimble Struttings of the ‘cake walk’ will soon absorb the attention of 4 :
; the Austrian capital.” ]
1 4 i
Ragtime 137 : 5 |
UN

--- Page 12 ---
4 ~~
Newspaper articles and other sources documenting performanc- --
_ es of cakewalk by African Americans describe mainly the dances, and, _
consequently, the dance craze, rather than the accompanying mu- a
sic. As was the case with sheet music, the borderline between cake-
walk and ragtime performance cannot be clearly drawn. Because the i
boundaries between cakewalk and ragtime are blurred, references to -
these two genres have often been used interchangeably. We do not .
know with certainty what kind of music was played when cakewalk a.
was danced; however, the influence of these American dance tradi- a
tions on European ballroom dance can hardly be overemphasized. Le
Will Marion Cook was among the first African Americans who |
introduced the cakewalk in Europe. In 1899, Cook’s Clorindy; or, The i
Origin of the Cakewalk, the first show featuring African Americans and _
produced solely by African Americans, opened in London and was re- _
ceived with enthusiasm. The performances by Cook and other African .
Americans such as Arabella Fields, Lewis Douglas,” The Four Black
Diamonds, the Louisiana Troupe, and others span the first two decades _
of the twentieth century. Some artists adapted their programs to |
European tastes.* For instance, Arabella Fields, whose career in Europe a
spanned more than 30 years, is known to have added Alpine songs and .
Austrian yodeling to her performances while touring Austria.“ ——
The proliferation of cakewalk dancing and the favorable recep- .
tion of African American artists and their music reflect the existence .
of a general positive attitude toward new influences from America.
At the same time, negative appraisals of African American music and
performers were also commonplace. While approval went hand in
hand with a general fascination with American life and new develop-
ments, rejection was based on the fear that European culture might
be threatened. Although some European musicians and music lovers
were able to appreciate and recognize the distinctive characteristics
of African American musics, identifying the products as uniquely
American, those who rejected American influences felt ragtime
would possibly have a destructive effect on Western art music.*° In
general, ragtime was not produced on piano rolls in Europe, because
European White middle- and upper-class audiences would not accept
African American popular music in their traditional bourgeois living
rooms, where culture was strictly defined as European heritage.
Ragtime
Musicians visiting the United States sometimes brought African
American ragtime as sheet music back to Europe; generally, though, it
took one or two years until a piece of music arrived in Europe.*® Soon,
European composers began to imitate the new popular style of music
associated with America. Although ragtime sheet music was produced
in Europe, it came into existence under sociocultural conditions to-
tally different from those in the United States. The social background
138 African American Music -
a

--- Page 13 ---
Tmanc- that was the breeding ground for ragtime in the United States was
sand, totally lacking in Europe, as were the performers and variety of play-
= mu- ing styles that were the lifeblood of ragtime. The classical ragtime
- cake- composers like Scott Joplin, James Scott, and Joseph Lamb were
-se the largely unknown outside the United States. What European compos-
ices to ers thought was ragtime was far removed from the African American
“2 not originals, African American musical elements were reinterpreted in
cewalk accordance with traditional European musical values and practice.
tradi- European composers created their own versions (song, dance, in-
zed. strumental music) of the new American idiom and German-Austrian
.s who publishing houses produced much sheet music at a time when there
-«. The were no sound recordings. Therefore, these publications are the
3 and most important source for documenting the reception of ragtime
vas re- and early jazz in Europe.*’ In German-speaking countries, it became
“=tican common practice to translate the titles of original American cake-
Slack walks and rags into German. The German-Austrian Publishing
22ades House Ullstein (Berlin and Vienna), for example, edited a special
ns to issue titled “Amerika-Heft” as part of their magazine, Musik fir ]
“rope Alle. Monatsheft zur Pflege volkstiimlicher Musik [“Music for everybody.
sand Monthly paper for popular music.”] This publication also contains
Kerry Mills’ “Whistling Rufus,” with the title translated into German
recep- (Figure 5.1),
stence
sericea. -§ mes Gy 2 Figure 5.1
i) - ) Sas Ms yy "SF. Kerry Mills’
sc and ae iF ens ty an “Whistling Rufus.”
; RE Wheres, (VIASS stling Rufus.
sad in Le) \E \ Ae ‘ A we In “Amerika-Heft,”
210p- Hiss rie Kap te 7 a\\ o, : 1 Musik fiir Alle.
cht te a ED | EA) \ Monatsheft zur Pflege
tS Via cp ha te ; ‘ volkstiimlicher Musik.
Lovers on ae a a
ees KERRY MILLS: Rufus, das Pfeifiger!.
2ovrmMe AWhistiag Rufus.)
saw EF In Cake Walk - Marsch. q
~ Introduction. z
= ee a7. SSeS SS
/ 6: — eo SS = SS ee SS peas
Ecce pe Piano. i" ti | dg # t-
doing 7996s Pe ee et
i x a
2 Marsch. ods z 4
Pipe. pet Eee $e
fr ee = SS aS aia —
en a i —: s _—_# _s
le para pet tery ==
Pozar = ee ee :
oe j 2 tee 2 .
Soom, st. eS F [tito tt =f - #—¥
* omc ee SS no
dope fgg Sete te gee a= =
nes Pe Sp ee | ee
a Neg fe fee Say Sars
Se. Moti be SES “eyerse js = = cet =H
Coovrieht 1899 ty EA. Mulls 4s., OIE Se Newekes 1
Ragtime 139

--- Page 14 ---
We have no knowledge of specific ragtime playing styles that iy Galler Bar
were transmitted, adopted, or developed by Europeans. Furthermore, containing the
there is no evidence of the existence of such practices as ragging a (1917-1918), *
tune, nor do we have testimony of improvisation and variety in tag- :
time playing styles. Ragtime published in Europe was generally less RAGTIME REV
syncopated, as was the case for the American pieces of music that Although ince:
became popular in Europe. Nevertheless, the impact of American ceeds cent
piano and instrumental ragtime on European popular music is since the early
evident, even though ragtime as a distinct playing style did not exist music: Kegeare
in Europe. Although certain titles became extremely popular, these sourherye and elt:
were not necessarily the same pieces of music that enjoyed popular- We elles end
ity in the United States. In German-speaking countries, well-known a i
favorites included “Whistling Rufus,” “Temptation Rag,” “Grizzly early 1940s a
Bear,” “Brooklyn Cakewalk,” “Hiawatha,” and “At a Georgia Camp jase Bard reco:
Meeting.”** Kerry Mills’ “At a Georgia Camp Meeting,” translated style. The bane
into German, became one of the most popular pieces in Germany and Mills “At a Ge
Austria, presumably contributing to the dissemination of cakewalk and White Raz
(music) in the German-speaking countries. It was also printed in the eonewed intere:
Illustrierte Zeitung Leipzig article already noted. ragtime per for:

Although African American music was not always received with on the work o
enthusiasm, European musicians, mainly composers working for Sy tingardtiss saad -
the entertainment business (operetta, song), recognized its musical well as the lives
quality, rhythmic novelty, and its impact on traditional styles of com- ing to Berlin c
posing. Among those who accepted the new American idiom, the per- a Changer
centage of European Jewish composers is comparatively high.*” They 1971: first © die
apparently more readily adopted new music styles, seeking influences Sioumaphiee! —
for innovation and success in the entertainment business. “The for o .
Ragtime and Classical Music Aagcimie Socies

2n important r:

From the beginning of the emergence of ragtime, there was interaction vege cll ber

between ragtime and classical music. “Ragging the classics” was a ~saetirrasite de

feature characteristic of ragtime playing styles in the United States. sorinities inclu:

The interaction between ragtime and classical music was reversed when -awsletters or -

composers of classical music discovered ragtime as a new, promising » Farerneien anec:

element of composition. European composers such as Claude Debussy, sctomplished .

Paul Hindemith, Maurice Ravel, and Eric Satie incorporated ragtime Saw the leer

elements in their compositions and thus contributed to the diversity og music a

of compositional styles in the early twentieth century. -n2 of the ta

Claude Debussy probably heard ragtime when John Philip Sousa eas histor::-

and his band appeared in Paris in 1900. Debussy must have been canoes 1963 =:

attracted by the new sound of the African American idiom. As part of Sythe L9~ i.

his suite Children’s Corner (1908), he composed “Golliwog’s Cakewalk,” “naa Themes 5.

probably the best-known piano piece of this genre. Debussy also ee _

utilized ragtime in two later piano preludes: “Minstrels” (1910) and. ~~ srleats setae

“General Lavine-excentric” (1913). Eric Satie dealt with ragtime in - em'sp-musie=”.

140 African American Music F moa ag
~ a

--- Page 15 ---
‘ his ballet Parade (1917), while Igor Stravinsky wrote several works |
: containing the ragtime idiom, such as “Ragtime for 11 Instruments”
z (1917-1918), “Ragtime” (1918), and “Piano Rag Music” (1919). |
. RAGTIME REVIVAL |
i Although interest in tagume had declined by the first decade of the
= twentieth century, there have been several revivals in various forms |
; since the early 1940s, They include new recordings; reprinted sheet |
. music; research and oral history projects; formation of ragtime |
= society and clubs; the publication of journals, newsletters, and books; |
- live stage and television performances; and the use of ragtime as /
: soundtracks for Hollywood films. The first revival occurred in the |
early 1940s when the San Francisco-based Watter’s Yerba Buena |
- Jass Band recorded piano ragtime in the tradition of the 1920s jazz
- style. The band’s recordings of Scott Joplin’s “Maple Leaf Rag,” Kerry |
- Mills’ “At a Georgia Camp Meeting,” and George Botsford’s “Black | |
: and White Rag” exposed the music to a broad audience, generated a |
: renewed interest in the tradition, and inspired a new generation of | |
ragtime performers. Other ragtime activities of the 1940s centered |
: on the work of aficionados and scholars who began collecting oral
° histories and conducting research on the history of the tradition as |
- well as the lives of the musicians. The research of Roy Carew (accord-
ing to Berlin, Carew began publishing historical articles in 1943 in |
" Record Changer), Alan Lomax (1950), and Rudi Blesh and Harriet Janis {
(1971; first edition published in 1950) culminated in historical and |
biographical publications. 1 |
The formation of ragtime clubs in the 1960s, such as the
Ragtime Society (1962-) and the Maple Leaf Club (1967-), played ‘
an important role in sustaining interest and perpetuating ragtime. j |
| These clubs brought together ragtime enthusiasts and amateur i |
performers devoted to the preservation of “classic ragtime.” Their q :
activities included researching ragtime’s history and publishing
newsletters or journals that con tained articles, interviews, reprints j
of music, anecdotes, and newly discovered information. The more 1 i
accomplished ragtime performers presented concerts, frequently 1 )
using the lecture-demonstration format to include the history of 4
the music and composer in a performance context, Max Morath, q |
one of the leading figures of this ragtime revival, proclaimed rag- {
time as historian and en tertainer on numerous television shows. As q !
early as 1963 he published an anthology, 100 Ragtime Classics. 4 i
| By the 1970s, the formal study and performance of ragtime had 4 |
spread beyond the clubs of aficionados into the academy where q
performers and scholars sought to celebrate ragtime as a form of q
America’s “classical” music. Attention turned to Scott Joplin when q . |
Planist-musicologist Joshua Rifkin recorded the first of three 4
i Mt
=
; q
Ragtime 141 3 |
creer

--- Page 16 ---
albums of Joplin’s ragtime compositions. Unlike other pianists, who KEY NAN ‘=
took liberties in interpreting Joplin’s rags, Rifkin performed the este Ie -
music as notated on the score, without any form of improvised em- — e
bellishments. Although this concert-style approach generated some wes ‘lores
| criticism, the interest in Joplin’s music proliferated among intellec- 1 —
| : James Scoz
| tuals and resulted in the subsequent release of The Collected Works Tohn Staz‘s
,; —? J ars
: of Scott Joplin by the New York Public Library, the formation of the Tom Tum:
| New England Conservatory Ragtime Ensemble, and the production ve”
| of Joplin’s opera Treemonisha. In 1972, the Atlanta Memorial Arts QUESTIO*
| Center, in conjunction with an African American music workshop _
| sponsored by Morehouse College, staged a production of Joplin’s 1 Wks
; opera Treemonisha. Three years later, in 1975, the Houston Grand acre:
| Opera produced a fully orchestrated and choreographed version of 2. Whe
| the opera, which was followed by a production in New York City .
: at the Uris Theater on Broadway. In 1976, Scott Joplin was post- LOE
) humously awarded a Pulitzer Prize, and Treemonisha has since been a. EL
| produced in Europe. pec
Overlapping these and other revivalist activities were the publica- +. How
tions of scholarly works on the music and life of Joplin; these might Hos
: have been motivated by Harold C. Schonberg, who, in a Sunday New Wra
: York Times article in January 1971, advised: “Scholars, get busy on Scott Eur:
Joplin.” Since 1973, several scholarly works have been published on
: Joplin and ragtime in general, including those by Schafer and Riedel PROJECTS
| (1973), Terry Waldo (1976), Jasen and Tichenor (1978), James Haskins i, Gee
| (1978), Edward Berlin (1994), Susan Curtis (1994), and Tim Frew (1996), ca
! as well as various discographies, master’s theses, and doctoral disserta- come
| tions. Joplin became a household name in American popular culture in mee
: 1974 when his rags provided the soundtrack for the film The Sting. The 5 Pho
| film won several awards, including Best Musical Score, and the song seE--
| “The Entertainer” was on the pop charts for most of the year.”° thar
| Reviving the works of a composer such as Joplin is only one facet fest
| of ragtime’s revival. As early as the 1950s, a new generation of players % Wiew
and researchers came into existence and, with them, ragtime playing narglcl
became popular once again among ragtime aficionados in America em
and elsewhere, which can be observed to this day. At this point, the ABs
circle closes; ragtime, as in the old days, is alive as a playing style.
KEY TERMS ee
Cakewalk oe .
Classic ragtime an
Coon song = Bete 35
Cutting contest ¢ geet, oon
Rag or ragging 7 Serum itt
Royalties oo
Transcription _ a
142 African American Music "2 EP Mg
en
