--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Popular Music Studies, Volume 23, Issue 1, Pages 3-18
Working Day and Night: Black Masculinity
and the King of Pop
Andreana Clay
San Francisco State University
On 25 June 2009, I, like many others, spent the day shocked, saddened,
and mourning Michael Jackson’s death. I was initially surprised by my own
sadness and reflection as I pored over heavily trafficked YouTube videos,
Facebook status updates, and photo changes (documenting the various stages
of Michael Jackson’s development), and talking with others about my own
childhood memories. At twelve, I bought Thriller (1982) with my own
money and had the poster of him in a yellow button-down vest and bowtie—
with hands in pockets and gaze softly, but confidentially, focused on the
camera—over my bed. It was the beginning of my first year of junior
high, and Thriller provided the soundtrack to my budding sexuality: first
crushes, the movement away from my tomboy style to a more PYT (pretty
young thing) image, and a solidified race consciousness that I had not fully
identified before.

I reflected on these years as I listened to the emotional eulogies
from friends and entertainers at the Staples Center memorial service in
Los Angeles for Jackson several weeks later. During the ceremony, I was
most intrigued, not by the black-and-gold casket, which mourners passed
as they paid their respects, but by a brief conversation between Motown
founder Berry Gordy and his oft collaborator, Smokey Robinson, during
Gordy’s eulogy. Specifically, Gordy recalled hearing a ten-year old Michael
Jackson sing the Robinson-penned “Who’s Lovin’ You” with “the sadness
and passion of a man who had been living the blues and heartbreak his
whole life.” After hearing it, he told Robinson, “Hey man, he’s got you on
that one,” to which Robinson, who was twice Jackson’s age at the time,
agreed.

I use this dialogue and discussion to frame my discussion of Michael
Jackson’s performance of Black masculinity throughout his long career
and brief life. In particular, I examine Black masculinity by focusing
on how, beginning as a boy and later as a man, Jackson engaged with
popular discourses of race, gender, and sexuality. I focus primarily on public
© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

--- Page 2 ---
4 Andreana Clay
performances that illustrate two moments in his career in an effort to signal,
as others have, how the performance of Black male sexuality and masculinity
continues to be limited in popular culture and the everyday lives of African
American men (Alexander; Holland; Johnson; Neal). I will focus primarily
on a 1969 Jackson Five performance on the Ed Sullivan show, as well as
his 1992 “In the Closet” music video, to contribute to the discussions of
the hypersexualization and adultification of Black (male) bodies in popular
culture.

Man-Child: A Kingdom Assured

In her 1984 article “Man-Child: A Black Feminist Response,” Audre
Lorde poignantly writes about the experience of raising Black boys and girls
in what she calls “the mouth of a racist, sexist, suicidal dragon” (74). Against
this landscape, Black childhood is marked by survival, where “they must
also be raised to recognize the enemy’s many faces” (75). While it may be
easy to point to contemporary understandings of the enemy—the police,
the prison industrial complex, the media, etc_—the enemy is also present in
the state-required experience of all youth: school. Based on ethnographic
research of elementary schools in the San Francisco Bay Area, Ann Arnett
Ferguson found that teachers, parents, and community members routinely
“adultified” Black children. This was most salient in her observations of
Black boys at Rosa Parks Elementary School whose experience in the
classroom was informed by two dominant perceptions of their livelihood—
endangered species and criminal. She states,

As an endangered species, they are stuck in an obsolete stage of

social evolution, unable to adapt to the present. As criminals, they

are a threat to themselves, to each other, as well as to society in
general. As black children’s behavior is refracted through the lens of
these two cultural images, it is “adultified.”. . . [T]heir transgressions
are made to take on a sinister, intentional, fully conscious tone that

is stripped of any element of childish naiveté. (83)

In this cultural landscape, the ideology of “boys will be boys” is
replaced with (Black) boys will be, at the very least, violent, if not vicious
(sexual) predators, who will either physically or socially die by the time they
are twenty-one.' As Holland suggests, “Blackness has a special relationship
with the dead that the distance between speaking subject and (in)tangible

--- Page 3 ---
Working Day and Night 5
place is not so vast at all” (385). This discourse serves as the justification
for the hypersurveillance and criminalization of Black male bodies in both
the public and private sphere (see Kelley; Rios).

Because of his early ascension into pop-culture superstardom, it
may be easy to forget that Michael Jackson, as a young Black boy, was not
immune to the consequences of adultification. In fact, it may have been the
guiding force for the routine beatings that he and his brothers endured at
the hands of his father. Both Michael and Joe Jackson admit to the same
physical abuse that the boys would receive if their dance steps were out of
line during practice. In his interview with Martin Bashir, Jackson recounted
that his father would sit in rehearsals with a belt and would “tear you up” if
you did not get it right (ITV).” In this instance that beatings may have been
related to mastering the particular steps associated with the performance,
but they can be seen as encouraging the mastering of the race and gender
expectations of real Black men. Joe Jackson, of course, is not alone—nor is
he individually at fault—in his child-rearing techniques. Many Black men
(and women) recount being ““whupped” as a form of punishment as children
but also, ultimately, out of fear of and perhaps preparation for the mouth
of the dragon that Lorde describes.* The effects of this surveillance are
imprinted on Black male bodies, including Jackson’s, as observed in the
perfected and rehearsed performances throughout his career.

The Little One in Front Is Incredible

Shortly after singer Diana Ross discovered the Jackson Five in Gary,
Indiana, the Motown-produced group made their first appearance on the Ed
Sullivan Show in 1969 (BornFree). Promoting their debut album, Diana Ross
Presents the Jackson 5, the brothers performed two numbers, their number-
one hit “I Want You Back,” and a truncated version of their remake of
Robinson’s “Who’s Lovin’ You.” While both performances showcased their
brutally rehearsed dance moves, it was the latter upon which a discussion of
the racist and sexualized expectations of Black boys and men first emerges.
Ed Sullivan, in traditional form, introduces the Jackson Five as “the five
brothers from Gary, IN.” As the audience applauds, the camera pans to the
group—Tito on guitar and next to the youngest, Marlon; Jackie, the oldest,
in the middle; and Jermaine, anchoring the lineup, on bass. Michael stands
in front of the group and steps up to the microphone to speak to the audience,
including his brothers, who participate in a call-and-response manner,

--- Page 4 ---
6 Andreana Clay

MICHAEL: I want to tell you a story about a girl I met in school one
day [pause] during sandbox.

BROTHERS: During sandbox? What is he talking about?

MCHAEL: We toasted our love during milk break.

BROTHERS: Toasted our love over milk break?

MICHAEL: [Looking exasperated looks back at his brothers and then
to the audience] I gave her my cookies! [He then motions
his hands in a similar style to James Brown, demanding
“silence” from the other members of the group.] So we
fell out during finger painting.

BroTHERS: Ah!

MICHAEL: So one day, and that was Monday, and I stepped up to
her and I said...

It is at this point that the tenor of the story changes as Michael steps
up to the microphone, a drum taps, and he begins to sing, “When I had you/I
treated you bad/And wrong my dear/And girl since you went away/Don’t
you know/I sit around with my head hanging down/And I wonder who’s
loving you.” As his brothers join in to sing the refrain, “Who’s lovin’ you,”
Michael croons, hands stretched out, “I, I, I wonder,” finally shouting at the
audience, “Hey! Oh! Ah, dig it now,” as the song ends, reaffirming the pain
and loss he has just described.

As soon as the song ends, the group runs over to do the requisite
bow and brief introduction with Sullivan as the audience applauds. Shouting
over the applause, Sullivan points to Diana Ross in the audience, citing her
as the person who discovered them in Gary. After the group leaves the stage,
Sullivan praises Ross: “Diana you’ve really, that’s really a—those youngsters
are amazing. And, the little one in front is incredible” (BornFree).

Jackson was incredible in this performance. I have watched the
video over and over again, both as a mourner and as a researcher for
this piece, and it is hard to believe that that sound—imbued with the pain
and authority of heartbreak—comes out of Jackson’s small, eleven-year-old
frame. But it’s the sound that is ultimately perplexing, not necessarily his
knowledge of pain. Reviewing the video reminded me of Smokey Robinson’s
answer to Berry Gordy’s memory of this song during his own eulogy
(PoliticsNewsPolitics):

I wrote that song. [He laughs.] 1 thought I sang it. I wrote that song

... and a few years later, here comes this kid and he’s ten years old

--- Page 5 ---
Working Day and Night 7

... and, a couple weeks later they [the Jackson Five] recorded my
song and, I heard it and I thought to myself, now they have pulled a
fast one on us because this boy cannot possibly be ten years old. This
song is about somebody who has somebody, who loved them, but
they treated them bad. They treated them so bad till they lost them
and now they are paying the price of wanting somebody back that
they treated bad and lost. How could he know these things? I quickly
went over to him because I wanted to see his birth certificate. I didn’t
believe that someone that young could have that much feeling and
soul and know—he had a lot of “know.” He had to know something
to sing like that.

Robinson’s reaction is telling in that it is similar to many who see a
boy singing with all of the emotion that comes from a painful break up—
how can he do that? At the same time, he suggests that “he had to know
something to sing like that.” And it is clear, in this performance, that the
dangers of growing up Black and male were clear to him.

There is little trace, outside of his physical frame and the context
of finger painting and the sandbox, that Jackson is prepubescent in the
Ed Sullivan Show performance. In effect, it seems like an effort in this
performance to be an eleven-year-old boy. At times during the two minutes
they are on stage, he even seems older than his siblings. The seriousness
of his performance, the authority in his facial expressions and voice, along
with the perfection and command of his body as he danced, do not fit with
traditional behavioral, sociological, or psychological stages of development.
This is prepuberty, and he is already supposed to be a man, even as he tries
to contextualize his love during an elementary school “milk break.” This
is especially true when he begins to sing and his entire body language
takes on a new tenor—one that, though viewers know is rehearsed, looks
natural, evoked with the ease of a professional. It is so convincing that, upon
viewing, you agree with Robinson that “this boy could not be ten years
old.” The adultification of young Black boys clouds our understandings
of their youth, often applying not only endangered species and criminal
expectations upon young Black boys, but also, and central to this analysis,
a hypermasculinized and oversexualized nature.

For Jackson, the problem of Black boyhood emerges as audience
members, who like Sullivan, Robinson, and Gordy, are confounded by his
age, yet accept and even celebrate his manhood. As a culture, we reiterate
over and over again in popular discourse that children are unable to express

--- Page 6 ---
8 Andreana Clay
the emotions, the authority, or the (sexual) passion of adults—unless they
are Black boys. In the less than two minutes that Michael Jackson performs
“Who’s Lovin’ You,” consumers simultaneously accept his sexual authority
and reject his status as youth. With his outfit of purple vest and hat—a
style that emerged and was attributed to pimps in Blaxploitation films of
the 1970s—he personifies how Black male presentations and performance
are always linked to sex. That is where Black men are able to have some
legitimacy, something they are aware of at an early age.

While reviewing the Jackson Five clip, I was reminded of a
conversation I had with my own father about when he became aware that
he had to be a man or, as my father suggested, “you know, stop writing
poetry and laughing and stuff like that. I think I was about nine.” Similarly,
an older, male cousin and I were recently talking about our teenager years
and sex, when he told me he lost his virginity at age six. When I pressed
him, suggesting that it sounded like he was forced to have sex, or may
have been abused, he stood firm saying that that was when he knew he
was a man. Perhaps more evident of the early awareness of the intersection
of sex, masculinity, and Black manhood is the story of Ronnie Paris, Jr.,
whose father tried to “toughen him up” by teaching him how to box. He
later admitted in a Florida court that he punched Ronnie so hard that the
three-year-old suffered brain injuries that ultimately resulted in his death.
The father also eventually confessed that he was teaching his son how to box
because of his “soft” tendencies, hoping that when he grew up, he wouldn’t
be gay (Montgomery).

As these stories suggest, the race and gender status of Black men
is inextricably linked to their (hetero)sexual identity. As E. Patrick Johnson
claims, like other Black boys he understood his sexual identity (and related
expectations) early on. As a child, he routinely heard his grandmother use
the word “quare” or “queer” to “denote something or someone who is
odd, irregular, or slightly off-kilter. ... On the other hand, she also deploys
quare to connote something excessive” (136, emphasis added). Johnson’s
grandmother’s use of the word “excessive” is important in this instance
because it reinforces the boundaries or limits of Black masculinity and
manhood—those regulations of accepted performance that are central to
Black sexual performance, regardless of gender. Because representations
of Black male masculinity are so rooted in sexuality, sex, and sexual
prowess, to be “off-kilter,” as Johnson’s grandmother suggests, indeed
denotes something that is out of the ordinary. While current disdain for
excessive sexuality is currently rooted in discourse related to Black men,

--- Page 7 ---
Working Day and Night 9
same-sex sex, and the “down low,” African Americans have long been
scrutinized for expressions of sexual behavior. In some cases, the display
of any sexual behavior, or what may be perceived as sexual behavior, is a
punishable offense, the worst of which ends in death, as seen in the 1955
torture and murder of fourteen-year-old Emmett Till for allegedly whistling
at a white woman.

Our collective fascination with Black male bodies, or what Mark
Anthony Neal refers to as the “hyper-masculine, hyper-deviant, and hyper-
sexual” image of Black men, is evident in contemporary images in popular
culture. Perhaps most often recognizable in hip-hop culture, these images
also surface in various print media, like a recent Vogue cover featuring
basketball player LeBron James (resembling King Kong) and fashion
model Giselle Biindchen (as damsel-in-distress Ann Darrow); the leaked
mug shots of Harvard professor Henry Louis Gates after his 2009 arrest
on the front steps of his house; and many, if not all, of the images of
mainstream hip-hop artists. In each of these settings, the limited range of
Black masculinity surfaces, taunting Black men to risk challenging the
boundaries of hypermasculinity. As Mireille Miller-Young suggests in her
discussion of Black masculinity in hip-hop, “Hegemonic white masculinity
defines black masculinities as non-normative, monstrous, dangerous, and
feminized. ... [P]erformances of hypermasculinity thus attempt to subvert
such constructions by embracing them on one’s own terms” (275). Michael
Jackson’s authority and acceptance in the performance of “Who’s Lovin’
You” was rooted in the heteronormativity in the song, which was reified in
the televised performance. As an audience, we invested in this image for
this brief, early moment in his career—arguably for the last time.

Keep It in the Closet: Sex is Dangerous

Even though Jackson had a firm imprint on my youth, I always
perceived him as being too clean. My friends and I complained after
watching “Billie Jean,” “Thriller,” and “Beat It? on MTV that we did
not really know who he was, or his true self, because his performances
seemed so stylized. We wanted to know the real Michael and searched
for an authentic personality or real person connected to his performances
(Frith; Hall; Mufioz; Kelley; Auslander). As Black youth, we were invested
in him as a Black performer who was receiving attention from around the
world, but who was also so different from the Black boys and men in our
lives. Later, when I firmly took my place in the Prince Rogers Nelson camp

--- Page 8 ---
10 Andreana Clay
(of fans), I was no longer on a quest to understand the real Michael. My
friends and I had Prince’s music on rotation because it (and we assumed, he)
was dirtier, more explicit and unafraid to “go there.” Besides, we liked that
he was “kind of like a girl”—with his ruffled shirts, high-heel boots, and
custom-made, skintight pants that he wore in most of the music videos from
the soundtrack to the movie Purple Rain (1984). He seemed to possess a
sexual freedom that Jackson was unaware of or uninterested in. Prince even
attributed his songwriting credits on “If I Was Your Girlfriend” and “Strange
Relationship” to his female alter ego, Camille.° Although his masculinity
was still limited in its connection to sex and sexuality, Prince was able to
play around with his sexuality in ways that Jackson was never allowed to
as an adult.° Throughout his career, there are few instances where Michael
Jackson’s manhood is accepted as much as it was in that early televised
performance.

Beginning with Thriller, Michael Jackson’s (Black) heterosexual
authority began to change (which was also around the same time his physical
alterations became more apparent: cleft in chin and second rhinoplasty). In
fact, between the 1969 performance and his death in 2009, his expressions
of overt sexuality diminished. In those forty years, the confidence and
authority he expressed as a teenager faded as he opted for a shyer,
“sensitive” persona—one well outside of the norms of Black masculine
performance. Often, these performances were ridiculed in popular culture.
Take, for example, comedian Eddie Murphy’s depiction of Michael Jackson
in Murphy’s live HBO show, Delirious. Murphy famously discusses how
the primary way to seduce a woman is being able to sing—regardless of
looks. He cites Mick Jagger and Luther Vandross as examples of men with
questionable looks (Jagger’s “big lips” and Vandross’s weight). He then
focuses on Jackson, who he says “can sing, and is a good-looking guy, but
ain’t the most masculine fellow in the world,” to which the audience roars
in laughter. He later imitates his rendition of “She’s Out of My Life,” where
Jackson cries during the recording, which makes the women swoon. Five
years later in Raw, Murphy revisits this theme:

Michael’s so famous, everything he says, the public believes. He

went on television and said, “I don’t have sex because of my religious

beliefs,” and the public believed it. Brothas was like, “Get the fuck
outta here.” And white people were like “That Michael’s a special
kind of guy. He’s special, he’s good, clean and wholesome.” You
all believed it. You know how I know you believed it? Because

--- Page 9 ---
Working Day and Night iN
he took Brooke Shields to the Grammys and nobody said shit. And,
Brooke Shields is the whitest woman in America. .. . You find “white
woman” in the dictionary [there would] be a picture of Brooke. She’s
white. And, this nigga took her to the Grammys and nobody said
shit.

Murphy’s discussion of Jackson in these examples points to two realities.

First, he reiterates the racist limitations of Black masculinity: the concept that

the Black man is primarily a sexual being who is unclean and unquestionably

a threat to white women. Therefore, Jackson’s authenticity as a Black man

is questionable, if not a complete failure. Any Black man who uses tears to

seduce a woman is not a heterosexual, nor a man. This was further reinforced
by the confidence that Jackson would not, in Murphy’s words, fuck Shields

(as opposed to Murphy’s hypersexualized and masculine identity as a Black

man who, he assured the audience, would). However, his critique also points

to both Jackson’s and Murphy’s performance of these identities, and although

Jackson fails to secure an acceptable Black masculinity, he lands at the other

end of the spectrum by making white people believe he is exceptional.

Public ridicule and questioning of Michael Jackson’s sexuality
(coupled with allegations of child molestation and elevation to mega-
superstar status) may have contributed to the drastic changes to Jackson’s
appearance and demeanor at the height of his career. His struggle to reclaim
the manhood that he was assigned as a child appeared in his aggressive
displays of heterosexual prowess in videos like “The Way You Make Me
Feel” (1987) and “In the Closet” (1992), which paired him with a female
counterpart. In each video, Jackson’s manhood was questioned again, not
for his age, which was fully within societal definitions of manhood, but
because of his odd, or quare, performances.

In the 1992 music video for “In the Closet,’ the lyrics and images
combine, acting as a stage for Jackson’s sexual displays. Paired with
supermodel Naomi Campbell, the video opens with Campbell caressing
herself while a female voice-over says, “There’s something I have to say
to you/You must promise to understand/I cannot contain myself in your
presence/ I’m so hot/Touch me/Don’t hide our love/Woman to man.”® There
is a brief, dramatic pause, which seems to characterize Jackson’s video
introductions, as he jumps into the frame in front of Campbell and begins
gyrating in a fast-paced manner to the backdrop of an electronic drum
machine. He begins to sing,

--- Page 10 ---
12 Andreana Clay
She’s just a love / Who’s doin’ me by / It’s worth the giving / It’s
worth the try / You cannot cleave it / Or put it in the furnace / You
cannot wet it.

The lack of clarity of the lyrics is linked to a disjointed feel in the video—

both when Jackson and Campbell are dancing alone in separate frames, as

well as when they are together. Together they gyrate in proximity of each
other, bodies barely, if at all, touching. For example, Campbell may start
out behind Jackson, holding his hips, as both performers gyrate in unison as

Jackson mouths the lyrics to the chorus:

There’s something about you baby / That makes me want / To give it

to you / I swear there’s something about you baby.

There are other moments in the video where the two, awkwardly, display
more sexualized dance moves; one scene includes Jackson sliding between
Campbell’s open legs as she hangs from a structure on set. When they are
separate, Jackson takes center stage and seems to be within his comfort zone,
secure in the highly choreographed and perfected dance moves that made
him famous. As opposed to the scenes where he gyrates near Campbell,
biting his lip in a knowing, sexual manner as he looks away from her, when
he is alone his face disappears in a full-toothed smile as he faces the camera
head on, nailing every rehearsed step. In the end, he keeps the audience
guessing about whether it is the woman or the camera he “wants to give
it to.” Even though he is verbalizing and going along with the acceptable
range of Black masculinity—she wants to get it, I want to give it to you—his
gestures, his presentation, and the inclusion of model Naomi Campbell as
the presumed receiver of “it,” are still not acceptable. He either consciously
or unconsciously is unable to achieve the script of Black male masculinity,
demanding to “keep it in the closet.”

Here, Jackson plays around with his performance of Black mas-
culinity: not having to recontextualize it on the playground, but, rather,
in a landscape where his physical alterations and queer indiscretions were
heavily scrutinized. At the same time, the hypermasculine, bad-boy image
was firmly planted in R&B and hip-hop cultures.’ Jackson tries to place
himself among these images, almost competing with them in one of his
more sexually suggestive songs. However, the most dangerous aspect of
the song, perhaps, is in the title. As Rolling Stone suggested in the 1992
review of Dangerous, Jackson is the only musician who could get away with

--- Page 11 ---
Working Day and Night 3
using a well-known phrase for sexual discretions and, more importantly,
“closeted” gay identity (Sedgwick).'° Playing around with language and
suggestion in this manner taunts the listener, prompting further questions
about his sexuality. As Marlon B. Ross asks in his critique of Eve Sedgwick’s
discussion of the closet, “What does it mean for African Americans to
uncloset their sexuality within the context ofa racial status already marked as
an abnormal site over and against white bourgeois identity and its signifiers
of racial normativity?” (181) This seems to be a question that, because of
his race and gender status as a Black man, Jackson refused to answer.

Off the Wall: There Ain’t No Rules

Michael Jackson’s death triggered an outpouring of grief and sadness
on a global scale. Top government officials all over the world, including
President Barack Obama, commented on his death, urging fans to remember
the joy he brought to their lives and his career. On Oprah, his sister, Janet
Jackson, said that she is unable to look at videos or pictures of her brother,
except when they were children, when things were fun (Wigler). I conclude
this article with another moment in Jackson’s life where he appears to
experience happiness and fun. The release of his 1979 album, Off the Wall,
was a distinct moment in Michael Jackson’s career: personally, the solo
debut was sandwiched in between his film role as the scarecrow in The
Wiz in 1978 and the worldwide phenomenon Thriller in 1982. The film
adaptation of The Wiz was universally panned by critics, except for Jackson’s
performance. A newfound freedom seemed to be sparked by that role, which
signaled his departure from Motown, the Jackson Five, and his youth. That
transformation is evident in Off the Wall, his first release from Epic Records
and his first collaboration with producer Quincy Jones.!! Though Jackson
has called it “one of the most difficult periods of my life” (Moonwalk, 164),
I argue that this was a brief moment of freedom from celebrity (just on the
brink of it), his childhood, and social death.

Released just two weeks before his twenty-first birthday, Off the Wall
exhibited typical displays of the end of youth: nights spent clubbing, overt
expressions of (hetero)sexuality, love begun and lost, and lessons learned.
Off the Wall is also indicative of the 1970s, a decade in its final year, trying
to hold onto the ideals of the time period over soul, disco, and funk beats.
Carefree lyrics like “There’s a chance for dancin’” from “Get on the Floor,”
“Let that fool loose deep down in your soul” from the title track, and “Girl,
when you dance, there’s a magic that must be love” from the number-one hit,

--- Page 12 ---
14 Andreana Clay
“Rock with You,” signaled a looser, more secure Jackson. A decidedly more
confident Michael Jackson also emerges in the video released with the album
for “Rock with You.” The video is technically flat by today’s standards, but
shows emerging video graphics in which Jackson will specialize and for
which he will become more famous in years to come. Two things take center
stage in this video: the singing of the song and Jackson’s establishment as a
solo artist, embodied in this moment.

Off the Wall was, essentially, his breakaway album and the first to
establish him firmly as a solo artist. And it was the first time, it seems,
that he looked comfortable in claiming his sexuality.!? You can hear his
doubtlessness in the music and lyrics of the album’s first track, “Don’t
Stop ’Til You Get Enough,” which is also one of two songs that Jackson
was the sole author on. From the very first lyrics, “Lovin’ is the feelin’
now,” audiences were warned of a different Jackson, someone who was
comfortable in his own skin, different from the strained, pleading sounds of
“Ben,” recorded seven years earlier (1972).'? He exhibits the same tone on
the first five songs, including “Rock with You” and “Get on the Floor,” and,
later, “Off the Wall.” The third track, “Working Day and Night,” displays a
tone and tenor that move him close to the expected roles of Black masculinity
and heteronormativity, sort of. In it, he begins to lay out the expectations of
what a man is supposed to do,

Ooh my honey

You got me workin’ day and night

Ooh my sugar

You got me workin’ day and night

Scratch my shoulder

It’s aching

Make it feel alright

When this is over

Lovin’ you will feel so right

I often wonder

If lovin’ you

Will be tonight

But what is love girl?

If I’m always out of sight

That’s why

You got me workin’ day and night

--- Page 13 ---
Working Day and Night 15

I don’t understand it

And Ill be workin’

from sunup to midnight

You got me workin’ day and night

You say that workin’

Is what a man’s supposed to do

But I say it ain’t right

If I can’t give sweet love to you

I’m tired of thinkin’

Of what my life’s supposed to be

Soon enough darlin’

This love will be reality

How can you leave girl?

Cause love for us was meant to be

Then you must be seein’

Some other guy instead of me
Though short, “Workin’ Day and Night” is complex; he is clear that he
knows what the heteronormative expectations of manhood are: working,
day and night, to get and keep a woman. At the same time, he skirts
those responsibilities, says he does not understand them as he prioritizes
his relationship with her—it ain’t right, if I cannot give sweet love to you.
He even pleads with her at the end, asking how she can leave, given that
their love was meant to be, all against the backdrop of an upbeat, disco
sound. He fit in with the times; like other popular R&B male singers at
the time, he was firmly within the period’s disco standards, which allowed
him to escape the social death that is inexplicably intertwined with Black
masculinity and Black manhood. Overall, he performs the heteronormative
standards of Black masculinity at the same time that he juxtaposes those
with partying and the dance scene, something that seems equally important
as he demands, in the next song, “Get on the floor, and dance with
me.” And we did, for years to come.
Notes

1. Orlando Patterson’s (1992) classic work, Slavery and Social Death,

marks this experience as one of isolation and powerless for enslaved Africans
in the United States and exclusion for enslaved Africans. Social death is
embedded in the contemporary discourses of African American masculinity

--- Page 14 ---
16 Andreana Clay
and identity; if they do not die at a young age, they are expected to be in
prison.

2. Shortly after Michael Jackson’s death, Joe Jackson adamantly denied
beating Michael and his brothers as children. However, he has since admitted to
spanking his children (ITV).

3. Lorde herself states that, when her son came home after being beaten
and ridiculed by another boy, she had to refrain from telling him not to come inside
crying, but, rather, to fight and beat the other boy.

4. Oprah Winfrey aired her second program on the “dangers” of the down
low on 7 October 2010.

5. From his 1987 album, Sign o’ the Times.

6. Lam not suggesting that Prince’s performance was outside the heteronor-
mative expectations of Black masculinity and manhood. Rather, his was on the
opposite end of the spectrum of Jackson’s.

7. From his 1992 release, Dangerous.

8. Originally listed as “mystery woman” on the album, the voice of the
woman was later identified as Princess Stephanie of Monaco.

9. Most notably in then new artist Jodeci’s presentation and style on their
debut album, Forever My Lady (1991).

10. R. Kelly, of course, became the second performer to try and get away
with singing about sexual indiscretions with the release of “Trapped in the Closet”
in 2005.

11. Quincy Jones worked on The Wiz, which is where he and Jackson began
their successful friendship.

12. This was also a time, it is widely rumored, that Jackson became
increasingly insecure about his appearance as he gained more attention.

13. Written originally for Donny Osmond and later offered to Jackson. It
was Jackson’s third number-one hit.

Works Cited
Alexander, Bryant Keith. Performing Black Masculinity: Race, Culture, and Queer

Identity. Lanham, MD: Alta Mira, 2006. Print.

Auslander, Philip. Performing Glam Rock: Gender and Theatricality in Popular

Music. Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P, 2006. Print.

--- Page 15 ---
Working Day and Night 17

BornFree. “Jackson Five: ‘Who’s Lovin You’ (Ed Sullivan Show).”
Perf. Jackson Five. 13 June 2008. Web. 13 Nov. 2010.
<http://www.stream.cz/profil/BornFree>.

Ferguson, Ann Arnett. Bad Boys: Public Schools in the Making of Black
Masculinity. Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P, 2000. Print.

Frith, Simon. “Toward an Aesthetic of Popular Music.” Music and Society: The
Politics of Composition, Performance, and Reception. Ed. R. Leppert and
S. McClary. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987. 133-50. Print.

Hall, Stuart. “What Is this Black in Black Popular Culture?” Social Justice 20.1—2
(1993): 104-15. Print.

Holland, Sharon. “Bill T. Jones, Tupac, and the (Queer) Art of Death.” Callaloo
23.1 (2000): 384-93. Print.

ITV. “ITV 2003—Michael Jackson: The Beatings from his Father Joe Jackson—
Candid Interview.” Perf. Michael Jackson. 11 July 2009. Web. 19 Nov. 2010.
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vHn_NSY-TM4>.

Jackson, Michael. “Working Day and Night.” Off the Wall. Epic, 1979. LP.

— .. “Don’t Stop ’Til You Get Enough.” Off the Wall. Epic, 1979. LP.

—. Moonwalk. New York: Doubleday, 1988. Print.

Jackson, Michael, and Rod Temperton. “Rock with You.” Off the Wall. Epic, 1979.
LP.

Jackson, Michael, and Teddy Riley. “In the Closet.” Dangerous. Epic, 1991. LP.

Johnson, E. Patrick. “‘Quare’ Studies, or (Almost) Everything I Know about Queer
Studies I Learned from My Grandmother.” Black Queer Studies: A Critical
Anthology. Ed. E. Patrick Johnson and Mae G. Henderson. Durham, NC:
Duke UP, 2005. 124-60. Print.

Kelley, Robin D. G. Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the Black Working Class.
New York: Free Press, 1994. Print.

Lorde, Audre. “Man-Child: A Black Lesbian Feminist’s Response.” Sister Outsider.
Berkeley, CA: Crossing, 1984. 72—80. Print.

Miller-Young, Mireille. “Hip-Hop Honeys and Da Hustlaz Black Sexualities
in the New Hip-Hop Pornography.” Meridians 8.1 (2008): 261-92.
Print.

Montgomery, Ben. “Dad Boxed with 3-year-old, Mom Says in Murder Trial.”
Tampa Tribune 13 July 2005. Web.

--- Page 16 ---
18 Andreana Clay

Mufioz, Jose Esteban. Disidentification. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P. 1997.
Print.

Murphy, Eddie, perf. Delirious. Home Box Office, 1983. Web.

—.. Raw. Paramount Pictures, 1988.

Neal, Mark Anthony. New Black Man. New York: Routledge, 2005. Print.

Patterson, Orlando. Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative Study. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard UP, 1992. Print.

PoliticsNewsPolitics. “Michael Jackson Memorial Service: Berry Gordy Eulogy.”
Perf. Berry Gordy. 7 July 2009. Web. 18 Nov. 2010. <http://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=3vibRwe8iCk>.

—. “Michael Jackson Memorial Service: Smokey Robinson.” Perf.
Smokey Robinson. 7 July 2009. Web. 18 Nov. 2010. <http://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=AVru-mzjm_4&feature=related>.

Rios, Victor. “The Hyper-Criminalization of Black and Latino Male Youth in the
Era of Mass Incarceration.” Souls: A Critical Journal of Black Politics,
Culture and Society 8.2 (2006): 40-54.

Robinson, William “Smokey.” “Who’s Lovin’ You.” Hi, Weve The Miracles.
Motown Records, 1960. LP.

Ross, Marlon B. “Beyond the Closet as Raceless Paradigm.” Black Queer Studies:
A Critical Anthology. Ed. E. Patrick Johnson and Mae Henderson. Durham,
NC: Duke UP, 2005. 161-89. Print.

Sedgwick, Eve K. Epistemology of the Closet. 1990. Berkeley: U of California P,
2005. Print.

Sony Entertainment. “Michael Jackson: ‘In the Closet.’” Perf. Michael
Jackson. 2 Mar. 2007. Web. 18 Nov. 2010. <http://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=zwvix7uEQg0>.

Wigler, Josh. “Janet Jackson Tells Oprah She Thinks of Michael Jackson
‘Every Day’.” MTVNews 3 Apr. 2010. Web. 18 Nov. 2010. <http://www.
mtv.com/news/articles/1635375/20100402/jackson_janet.jhtml>.
