--- Page 1 ---
. ae
39 * MUSIC IN WE:
\
3 + MUSIC IN WEST AFRICA an: |
‘ an”
Inland from the coast of Ghana the bush is dense for 150 miles. According 6. Fal
to the vegetation maps, the tropical rain forest thins out in Ghana, and, . uh a
compared with Sierra Leone or parts of Ivory Coast or Nigeria, is even @ AS
considered to be non-existent. But to the visitor, even though primal oe
forest probably survives nowhere in the country, the lush vegetation, the 6 Ashanti drur:
huge leaves like elephants’ ears, the soaring, unstable cotton trees com-
bine to give an impression of congested and barely tamed growth. Laterite and cult cere:
roads, red and hard, raising clouds of choking dust under the wheels of occasions whi
a ‘mammy wagon’ in the dry season, deeply rutted, saturated and often Every functic
impassably flooded in the rainy season, wind through the forest. Nar- are named sf
rower paths and twisting tracks lead off into the bush to villages of perform a lin
laterite mud houses and thatched markets. From these can be heard the the complex
rumble and thunder of the drums through the hours of the night and a from one orcl
soft roar of village voices. Above them, clear and penetrating, the sharp rhythms are ¢
clacking of the ‘gong-gong’ strikes a persistent, unflagging pattern until rhythms of t
daybreak. sets up an ex!
Driving through the bush one may happen upon a celebration; more dancing. And
often it can be heard from a distant and hidden village unlocated in the of a complex
deceptive acoustics of the bush. Occasions like these are often the wakes speak the tra
and successive celebrations which are held at intervals after the death of sound inte
of a member of the community. In Ashanti the number of functions and The elders
occasions when the villagers gather for dancing are numerous: puberty bring crates 0:
festivals, meetings of hunter and warrior associations, religious festivals the body witl
errr reece

--- Page 2 ---
:
|
| 39 ¢ MUSIC IN WEST AFRICA |
| \ Bow re
' ft > a > ol '
oe Ss ee) ee Ce _
Pace i” NRA " Se py! ree =
: i A) ee te ee =
; (ep BL a Vay. |
y ae ers
4 Eo . sal BS “Seely ) og - & —
, | 6 Ashanti drum orchestra with gong players in foreground and atum pan drums, left.
: I {
: and cult ceremonials, state assemblies and so on. And there are the social i |
occasions when the adoma bands play primarily for recreational purposes. |
| Every function has its special drum orchestras and often the drum groups |
PO are named specifically for the one dance or celebration for which they a
perform a limited number of instrumental pieces. To the untrained ear q |
pf the complex of rhythms is difficult to disentangle and the total sound
from one orchestra may seem very like that of another; to the Ashanti the
rhythms are distinct and the conjunction of patterns, the offsetting of the
i rhythms of the different drums against the gongs and against each other, ]
sets up an exhilarating tension whose complexity he may interpret in his |
1 dancing. And, while the rhythm patterns combine to produce a texture § |
i of a complexity which defies analysis, the atumpan, the ‘talking drums’, 4 |
i speak the traditional phrases in bursts, intermittent eruptions and rolls { |
| of sound intelligible only to those who can hear their language. 1
: The elders sit beneath shelters of palm leaves, while the young men |
a bring crates of locally brewed beer. Flaming orange cloths wrapped round : |
the body with one end thrown over the left shoulder proclaim that this |
7 |
|:
rm |
|

--- Page 3 ---
=
40 * SAVANNAH SYNCOPATORS 41 * MUSIC INV.
is a funeral. Purple cloths can be seen too, and very occasionally a black Sudan De:
one, but it is the great splash of indian red, with the adinkra patterns West Coas
stamped upon them, which gives a brave show of colour to the scene. terms of d
In the clearing, dancers raise small spurts of dust from their sandalled guished by
feet as they twist and turn, descend to their knees or leap in the air, to by the use «
imitate and interpret the occupations and the pleasures of the deceased A. Watern
and themselves. A chorus of women sings in chanting fashion, with one Merriam’s
woman leading with vocal lines to which they respond, seemingly with- three-drun
out relationship to the compelling rhythms of the adoma band. Shaded of music, ¢
by an awning, the adoma band pours out its rhythms, the two players of Africa and
the donno tension drums standing beside the atumpan drummer whose nowhere it
large instruments are raised before him on a stand. On his left sits the however, c
apentemma drummer with his alto drum, and the heavy-sounding petia and the de
drum is beside him. Behind are the players of the male and female ‘gongs’, noting that
banana-shaped tubes of metal struck with lengths of iron which create as well as |
a ringing, unvarying rhythmic line against the complex of variations within MUSIC AS Pe
the strict structure of the instrumental performance. If the excitement ments exc
of the drumming and the spectacle of the dancing seem contrary to the In the '
grief of the bereaved, they find solace in the messages of sympathy that the d
addressed to them by the atwmpan drums. the music
It was drumming like this which I heard at many functions through “We are alr
the kindness and grave courtesy of the elders and headmen of Ashanti event, suc!
villages. For me it was deeply exhilarating music and the occasions which rejoicing, 1
I was privileged to attend, culminating in a cult or ‘fetish’ dance for a local and music
obosom, or protective spirit, were simple and moving. But when I thought Born in 13
about the music being created here in the heart of the Ashanti region, to Virgini
the centre of slave trading on the Guinea coastal regions, it seemed far, Pascal, bu
far removed from jazz, still further from the blues. If the slaves came from an active r
here, what happened to their music to make so marked a transformation? rative was
Or were the slaves brought from other regions by the Ashanti and sold and the m
to the white traders at Winneba, or Sekondi or Bushwa? It seemed import- real life, s
ant to ascertain which music-producing cultures flourished in Africa and story, or s
what bearing they could reasonably have on the music of the Deep South. some rece!
Alan P. Merriam has identified as distinct musical regions those of the and variet
Hottentot-Bushman; East Africa; East Horn; Central Africa; West Coast, instrumen
a

--- Page 4 ---
Y
7”
41 ¢ MUSIC IN WEST AFRICA )
c.g Sudan Desert; and the North Coast. Of these the Central African and |
ms West Coast regions are ‘differentiated from each other perhaps more in
terms of degree than of kind’, he wrote, ‘The West Coast area is distin-
oo guished by a strong emphasis on percussion instruments and especially ‘ |
: by the use of “hot” rhythm.’ The idea of ‘hot rhythm’ is one which Richard _——
r J A. Waterman borrowed from jazz and applied to African drumming. In |
= Merriam’s view the ‘hot’ concept ‘as well as the traditional use of the
- three-drum choir and the consistent use of drums in a majority of types
_ of music, extends southward in the coastal regions of French Equatorial |
: Africa and the Belgian Congo’, but he points out that it ‘seems to be P|
= nowhere in Africa as strong as it is along the Guinea Coast’. Merriam, _
= however, questions Waterman’s emphasis on ‘drums, rattles and gongs’ |
and the dependence of most African musicians on percussion instruments, )
: noting that ‘this excludes the large number of string and wind instruments 4
*: as well as unaccompanied song. It would seem wiser to speak of African |
= music as percussive, rather than to emphasize the use of percussion instru- i
ae ments exclusively.’
Le ' In the West African region identified by Merriam it is indisputable
: ; that the drum orchestra has always played the most important part in |
the music of the many peoples and tribes that come within its compass.
s ‘We are almost a nation of dancers, musicians, and poets. Thus every great '
2 event, such as a triumphant return from battle, or other cause of public q
= rejoicing, is celebrated in public dances, which are accompanied with songs
: and music suited to the occasion’, wrote the Ibo slave Olaudah Equiano.
i Born in 1745 he was captured in a slaving expedition in 1756 and taken
- to Virginia. Later, he was taken to England and sold to Captain Henry
- i Pascal, but he purchased his freedom in 1766. In later years he became a
= | an active member of the anti-slavery movement and his / nteresting Nar- /
' rativve was published when he was forty-four. He described the dances j
- ¢ and the music of his tribe, each representing ‘some interesting aspect of |
re real life, such as a great achievement, domestic employment, a pathetic |
- | story, or some rural sport; and, as the subject is generally founded on
some recent event, it is therefore ever new. This gives our dances a spirit
. and variety which I have scarcely seen elsewhere. We have many musical }
- § instruments, particularly drums of different kinds, a piece of music which s
‘ P
!
|
|

--- Page 5 ---
rT
42 * SAVANNAH SYNCOPATORS 43 * MUSIC IN WES
resembles a guitar, and another much like a stickado. These last are chiefly .
used by betrothed virgins, who play them on all grand festivals.’ Equiano’s i 7 :
description would be quite applicable to the dances and the music of the 1
Akan, whose drumming orchestras play specific pieces of great rhythmic Fe 2,
complexity but to which the dancers invent new and descriptive steps. eer |
His ‘piece of music which resembles a guitar’ was probably a chordophone > |
such as is found among most West African coastal tribes, though not with hy, ,
the frequency of the drums. } ag
Between the lands of the Ibo and those of the Ashanti (Akan) of the ae
old Gold Coast (Ghana) lie the domains of the Yoruba of Nigeria and = aoe’
Dahomey, and those of the Ewe of Togoland and eastern Ghana. In these, La ei 4 a “
as well as in the sub-tribes, the drums are of great importance. Their ia ' a or
use is not static but shows both evolution and influence. So Anthony King 3 ; : lee
identified the Jgbin drum family as appropriate for the god Obatala, the eae
Bata drum family for the worship of Sango, Ogidén drums to worship i ole
Ogun and Jpési for the god Ifa, yet he observed in Yoruba Sacred Music - 9
that one drum family, Dundiin, ‘serve, instead of those previously listed, tha
in the worship of the gods concerned’. This adaptability and eventual
dominance of one type may help to indicate how a multitude of drum- of drumming
ming practices may have eventually been merged into a few basic ones drumming ar
on transplantation to the Americas, where, as has been noted, Sango and ‘Arising from
Ogun are still worshipped. sion for rhytk
Further west among the Ewe, the Reverend A. M. Jones did the field be turned, es
work which led to his important Studies in African Music, in which he by young anc
analysed in detail the structures of the Nyayito, Sovu and other funeral of a grasp ot!
and ritual dances of the Ewe, with the expert guidance of the master drum- of rhythms”
mer, Desmond Tay. ‘Drumming’, he contended in ‘African Rhythm’, the peoples o
‘is the very heart of African music. In it are exhibited all those features and contact a
of rhythmic interplay wherein African music differs fundamentally from Nketia in his
the West.’ He identified many salient characteristics: that ‘the main beats Africa, indic:
never coincide’, that crossing the beats ‘is absolutely fundamental to Similar in
African music’. These are substantiated in detail by Kwabena Nketia, coastal rain fc
whose studies of Drumming in Akan Communities identify some sixty kinds Charles Duy
of drum, more than a score of drum types and many specific functions for stress. Furth
which the drum orchestras are indispensable. How pervasive the importance belt are supe
naga _

--- Page 6 ---
| |
43. ¢ MUSIC IN WEST AFRICA
iefly o Poe t . |
no’s bi te — cs - |
a a eo ve
the Ce ae iy ;
3 aos, = eet F
ume Nay ff ay _
hone i —
i nn
with ie : 9
z i x y |
t the i i. cs
hese, Vee oe OS
ee ee ae
[heir pee Ned yi > ee |
the i. ee ne | |
rship ae Z % | i - |
\Vusic ee Y fo ha 7 An Ewe master drummer playing the
isted aS 4 a five-foot long atsimevu
y
ntual /
rum- of drumming is, he indicates in great detail, but the passion for rhythm,
- ones drumming and rhythmic dancing of the people is everywhere manifest: =
‘o and ‘Arising from the general conditioning for rhythm is a widespread pas-
sion for rhythm-making. Boxes, tins, pans, even mortars and pestles may j
> field be turned, especially temporarily, into instruments for rhythm making
ich he by young and old. There is usually in these excursions some indication :
uneral of a grasp of the principles of pitch contrast, phrasing and “crossing
drum- of rhythms” that underline Akan drumming.’ Between these tribes and |
thm’, the peoples of Dahomey, Togo and the Gold Coast there was influence j
atures and contact as the shared instruments, dances and tunings identified by |
. from Nketia in his paper, The History and the Organisation of Music in West |
1 beats Africa, indicate. \
rtal to Similar important drum orchestras are to be found throughout the
\ketia, coastal rain forest belts of West Africa as the recordings of Gilbert Rouget,
- kinds Charles Duvelle and Donald Thurlow among the Baule of Ivory Coast j
ons for stress. Further details of the drum traditions in the tropical rain forest |
ortance belt are superfluous, for the evidence of their-number and pervasiveness i
q C
J |
|
" a
(ia
. fr
th " .
aa ,
, ie a

--- Page 7 ---
—
a
| 44 «© SAVANNAH SYNCOPATORS 45 * MUS
is overwhelming. Comparison of the recordings reveals similarities of are 4
approach to rhythm and even, in some instances, similar rhythm patterns. the .
; Generally the master drum carries the burden of rhythmic complexity ago.
and the supporting drums, graded in size, pitch and tone, set up rhythms con
against it and each other. “The crossing of the beat must be established; pro
after that is done, additional drums may be added with main beats of dan
the bar coinciding with one or other of those already beating’, Father old
Jones has explained, ‘but with a different rhythm-pattern; or, in the case is P
of the master drum, once the first two drums have established a cross- dru
rhythm, he may do just what he likes; he usually creates a series of rhythm- frot
patterns whose main beat crosses at least one of the other drums.’ Professor cise
Nketia has pointed out that the rhythms are conceived either unilineally bea
with the patterns ‘assigned to one drum or a pair of drums played by one it
man, or to many drums played by different men. In the latter case, a bat
¥ number of the same type of drum or different drums may be playing the are
| particular set of rhythms together’; or multilineally, where ‘a number of fer
rhythm patterns are assigned to two or more drums, each drum or group Th
of drums beating different patterns or adopting different sequences of be.
patterns in such a way as to offset some beats of their respective patterns.’ W
Against these may be placed hand-claps, often by two or three individuals th
m or groups of people, whose clap rhythms are also played against each other, th:
while the ‘gongs’ or clapperless bells establish a metronomic time signal.
The suggestion that the master drummer may ‘do just what he likes’ is th
rather misleading, for the length and character of the rhythm phrases 1s ap
determined by the function, the nature of the dance and the ‘piece’ that Va
is being performed. Improvisation, in fact, is very strictly controlled. As I
Nketia has pointed out in a paper on the music of the Ga people, ‘the rh
drummers of an ensemble cannot just drum what catches their fancy. Sa
They have to know what is required of them in respect of rhythm and be
tone. They have to know the basic parts assigned to each drum and how C:
they are intended to be combined. For although the resources of drums *2
are limited, they can be arranged in different ways so as to produce drum c
pieces which can be clearly distinguished from each other.’ er
To what extent is the West African approach to drum music and its i
rhythms reflected in jazz and the blues? To Harold Courlander, the links c
si —_

--- Page 8 ---
' rT
45 © MUSIC IN WEST AFRICA
|,
of are direct. “There is no doubt’, he said, ‘that drums were widely used in j !
ns. the African manner in the United States as late as seventy or eighty years |
ry ago. Literature on Louisiana is prolific with references to drums. A survey '
ms conducted in the Sea Islands of Georgia only a relatively few years ago |
ed: produced evidence that persons then alive recalled the use of drums for
of dances and death rites. In Alabama in 1950 I found the remains of an |
ser old peg-type drum being used as a storage container for chicken feed. It |
ase is probable that the persistent use of the shallow tambourine or finger
es drum by certain Negro groups stems as much from African tradition as
~4- from European. In secular folk music, the wash-tub bass is played pre-
Sor cisely in the manner of the African earth bow: the string is plucked and
:ilv beaten by one player, while a second beats on the inverted tub as though )
one it were a drum.’ Harold Courlander has likewise compared the drum
= a battery of Baby Dodds with aspects of African usage. ‘Different tones
the are produced on the block by striking it in different spots and with dif-
yf ferent parts of the drumstick, as in the case of the African slit-log drum.
“up The left-hand “hard” beats are called “mama” and the right-hand “soft”
Sor beats are called “daddy”’ and he compares this with West Indian and
— West African terminology. Yet it must be acknowledged that, whatever
cals the links with African drumming, and they may not be as numerous as
“er, this suggests, conceptually jazz music is very different.
eal. To the ear accustomed to both jazz and African music, it is apparent : |
fig that the fundamental opposition of rhythms and the multilinear rhythmic |
ot approach of African drumming is only marginally echoed in American
“at jazz. ‘Though Waterman has emphasised the ‘hot’ character of the drum-
As ming of both cultures, jazz does not get its impetus from the use of cross- |
the rhythms, except in so far as the trombone, trumpet or clarinet may be
SOW. said to be used rhythmically. The ‘rhythm section’ is controlled heavily
ind by the ‘beat’ and this allows none of the tension to develop which is |
aye characteristic of the drum orchestras of the African rain forests. Instead,
“ms jazz developed a different kind of rhythmic feeling with a lifting move- |
am ; ment between adjacent beats which the jazz musician identifies as ‘rock’ )
or ‘swing’. Waterman relates this to the ‘metronome sense’: ‘Musical terms |
its like “rock” and “swing” express ideas of rhythm foreign to European
aks | folk tradition, and stem from African concepts, as does the extremely basic |
} I
| | _
ee
eau ce "

--- Page 9 ---
le
| .
3 46 ¢ SAVANNAH SYNCOPATORS 47 * MUSIC
-
idea of the application of the word “hot” to musical rhythms. The develop- are fai
_ ment of a “feeling for the beat”, so important in jazz musicianship, is sional
) neither more nor less than the development of the metronome sense.’ The 1
E But, if this is so, then nearly all the other African concepts of rhythm SUIVIN
were discarded in its favour, for, in the jazz sense, West African drum out th
orchestras simply do not ‘swing’. The ‘ride’ of a New Orleans jazz band, mente
the ‘slow and easy’ slow-drag of a country blues band, have no counter- the
part in the forceful thrust of the multilineal drum rhythms. remo\
In jazz drumming the most African-seeming characteristic of its rhythms these
lies in the shifting of accents to the weak or ‘off ’-beats — syncopation in of Na
fact. But syncopation of this kind is not an element of African drumming, of vou
and only appears so through the filter of western notation. ‘Any attempt the bl
to write African music in the European manner,’ wrote Father Jones, which
‘with bar lines running right down the score and applying to all the con- his ac
tributing instruments simultaneously, is bound to lead to confusion. instru
It gives the impression that all but one of the contributors is highly Sos
syncopated, and the multitude of tied notes and off-beat accents makes and 1]
the mind reel. Looked at from the point of view of each player, African a bod
music is not syncopated nor is it complicated except for the master-drum across
rhythms.’ Negr¢
In addition to those problems which arise from the relation of the jazz distin
approach in rhythm and syncopation to the West African concepts of move
drumming, there are similar difficulties stemming from the use of wind alisati
instruments and the nature of jazz improvisation. Though horns are used Altho
in parts of the rain forest, they are seldom employed with the drum orches- may t
tras and have relatively little flexibility. Improvisation on the theme, which into 1
is fundamental to jazz, also appears to owe little to improvisation within Josep
tight rhythmic patterns on the drums. Africe
All these problems are present in a still more marked degree when the sum
blues is considered. Largely a vocal music, it is also one which was, in feder:
its formative years, created by solo artists, or by pairs of musicians. The to Ibe
‘blues band’ is seldom of more than four or five pieces at any event, and (Asha
even when it is as large as this it is dominated by stringed instruments. the C
Blues singers working solo with a guitar or with a piano are in the major- many
ity; combinations of two guitars, guitar and mandolin, or guitar and piano or Mi
ane
a -
ae

--- Page 10 ---
- |
—
|
47 * MUSIC IN WEST AFRICA |
' |
-
are fairly common; while guitar and fiddle, guitar and harmonica or, occa-
sionally, piano and harmonica have all been popular in varying degrees. 1
! The use of string and tub basses, washboards, and jugs, with the rare |
i survival of banjo and the infrequent use of the kazoo, more or less rounds |
' out the customary use of instruments in the blues. When blues instru-
mentation, improvisation, rhythm and use of vocals are compared with ] |
the music of the rain forest drum orchestras they seem even further j
removed than jazz from this African tradition. It was precisely because of
' these considerations that the music of Kunaal and Sosira in the village
i of Nangodi seemed so important to me. For here was the combination }
i of vocal, rhythm and stringed instrument which hinted at a link with im
i the blues; here, too, I heard in person for the first time an African music —
| which could be said to ‘swing’ in the jazz sense, where the singer and a
4 his accompanist seemed free to improvise and where the combination of |
ie instruments had a certain feeling of syncopation. |
Sosira and Kunaal represented a different tradition in African music,
and though they were on the southern fringe of it they were related to
a body of song and musical expression which extended in a great belt
across the sub-Saharan savannah regions. Although they are all of them |
| Negro peoples, the tribes that inhabit this vast region are, in many ways, |
| distinct from those of the rain forest. The history is complicated by the _
movement of peoples during the past five centuries, but certain gener- a=
| alisations can be made which are substantiated by linguistic evidence. 1 |
Although virtually all the tribes of West Africa south of the Senegal River _
i‘ may be considered as speaking Sudanic languages, they may be grouped
a into major divisions which have been most exhaustively examined by
‘ Joseph H. Greenberg. Though some details are disputed, in general his :
African linguistic classification is accepted by scholars and may be briefly :
| summarised. ‘The coastal rain forest tribes, of which the Ashanti are a a
federation, come within the Kwa group which stretches from Liberia east
to Ibo territory in Nigeria. Within this belt are included the Baule-, Twi-
a (Ashanti- ), Ewe-, Yoruba- and Ibo-speaking peoples. North of them are :
the Gur group, taking in the Bobo, Mossi and Dogon peoples among
| many others, while to the north-west is the massive group of Manding-
7 or Mande-speaking peoples, including the Malinke (Mandingo), Bambara
\
|
; j j

--- Page 11 ---
Pr
48 * SAVANNAH SYNCOPATORS 49 * MUSIC IN
ee a: ar . § @ ee ..* te fat,
| ge o mes IK BR AEs A
OP Hivos i ell i i
| | . j < Bees j (adapted
‘ ae A a
pee i es, : oS
a vn : ee sossn T
- uf oe ‘ ou re ; a P sie
a ae ————-
. : ‘ 2 . op: = &
8 Chicago street band 1937, with guitar, banjo and tub bass; photo by Big Bill a5
Broonzy .
var. C
and Soninke. Along the coast from Senegal to Liberia are to be found nee
the west Atlantic sub-family which includes the Wolof, Diola and the k
scattered groups of the Fulani. Se }
Apart from the Kru-speaking peoples of Liberia, it will be seen that
the peoples of the drum orchestras are within the Kwa group. This is Whi S
partly due to the vegetation, which is dense tropical forest yielding large- Tt
boled woods suitable for the making of big drums. As one moves north 2H: Og
from the rain forest and into the tropical woodlands and savannah mosaic ne
regions, the trees become fewer and smaller. They are less suitable to e
the making of drums and are prized, when they do grow large, for the 9 West At
_

--- Page 12 ---
iu
49 ¢ MUSIC IN WEST AFRICA ;
Fe aig age | =
ee at |
Vesti: SD ee NAR gs -_
Wee Oy eg la caps | th |
ESSE eR: Ree y ee |
aye SO a PORN is ;
serene EO ES £52 OS
= ae |
i Ve Roe” |
4 i!
WEST AFRICA -— Linguistic areas
(adapted from J. H. Greenberg and others) |
West Atlantic: includes Wolof, Serer, Diola, Temne, and
gees = Fulani (the Fulani are pastoral-nomadic).
eset © Mande (Mandingo): includes Soninke, Malinke, Mende, =
sess Vat, Kpele, Dan, Guere, Bambara, and Dyoula. )
y
=—= Kru: small region including Kru, Grebo, and Bakwe. ; |
—
‘alt Gur: includes Senufo, Lobt, Dagomba, Grunshi, Gurenst, =
‘..° Mossi, Dogon, and Gurma. (With pockets of Mande Dyoula.)
‘ . . . 4 i
Kwa: includes Baule, Anyi, Ashanti, Fanti, Ga, Brong,- i
Ly iS P|
Yoruba, Nupe, and Ibo. \ |
"Hh Songhat. |
tit !
iiiit  Chado-Hamitic: includes Hausa, Sokoto, Bede, Ngizim.
ee i &
iiiit (Tuareg are Berber, penetrating from the north. Also |
* |
pockets of Fulant.)
g West Africa: linguistic areas
|
_ et — —— sioiisiing sii = eee I

--- Page 13 ---
50 * SAVANNAH SYNCOPATORS 51 * MUSIC INW
- shade they offer. Further north still, the savannah parklands give way Bt el,
e to steppe and, eventually, to the desert. In the savannah regions the woods go
% available for instruments are small-boled and they are more frequently ae
5 fashioned into resonators for stringed instruments, or into strips for xylo- (OSES
‘ phones. But in these regions calabashes and gourds grow, providing other Oe:
types of resonator, and the bodies for large calabash drums. Sees
For many centuries the savannah and grassland peoples have been SS
‘ assailed by Muslims from the north, so that many of them have totally
embraced Islam. Others have partially retained their pagan animism, while
some tribes are divided between pagan and Muslim groups. To the south
on the other hand, along the rain forest, the peoples have been exposed WEST AF
to Christianity and western missionaries, while their tribal religions are
strongly animistic and in some cases, the Yoruba for instance, have a &
pantheon of gods. Contact with Islam has affected the savannah peoples Sey
culturally in a number of ways, the Muslim strictures against representa- vee
tional arts, for instance, resulting in sculpture that is more abstract in a
form than the more figurative sculptures of the rain forest; many of the Dn oa
Manding-speaking tribes produce little sculpture at all. Of course, the
available woods again affect the artifacts, savannah sculptures tending ao: 8S
4 towards ‘pole’ forms, while those of the rain forest are more fully realised OOEES
in the round. The vegetation and climate also affect the crops; millet is Tre
the staple diet among the savannah peoples, yams and tree crops are se
" staples in the coastal belt. Ethnically, the peoples are complex, but those ro West Afri
on the coast include a large proportion with high counts of the sickle-cell
gene making them resistant to malaria and able to withstand heat and to Gambia :
high humidity; those in the savannah belt include large numbers of tribes live hundre
with low sickle-cell counts and lower resistance to malaria, yet they are environmen
physically more suited to a dry atmosphere, high day temperatures and rain forest, |
cool nights. guages. It is
North of the rain forest there stretches a belt of savannah and semi- studies conc
desert some 250 miles in depth and sweeping from Lake Chad in the in the Amer
interior eastwards for nearly 2,000 miles. It takes in the northern part of Ewe. North
Nigeria, and the southern part of Niger; dips over Dahomey and Togo drum orche
to take in part of Ghana; embraces the Republic of Upper Volta and the instruments.
southern part of the Federation of Mali; and takes in the north of Guinea base to the -
aE eee errr ee ee REI

--- Page 14 ---
51 * MUSIC IN WEST AFRICA
. ae oA EST )
. on er Lee
- ek ee NN re |
3 WEST AFRICA - Vegetation bo i
: Key |
a i. <!  Semi-desert and desert |
- ne a
. rrete Savannah steppe
i enews f
- |
z | suk Savannah grasslands and woodlands a
° Tropical rain- forest j |
- 10 West Africa: vegetation
to Gambia and Senegal on the west Atlantic coast. Within this great belt |
: live hundreds of tribes who are linguistically, culturally, climatically and
environmentally distinct from the Kwa-speaking peoples of the coastal
rain forest, even though they are all Negro and all speaking Sudanic lan-
t guages. It 1s the latter (Kwa) who have been the subject of comparative =
studies concerning African retentions in jazz and the music of the Negro
: . in the Americas: the drum-dominated tribes of the Ashanti, Yoruba and
i Ewe. North of them are peoples who also have drums and who also employ
| drum orchestras, but among whom are to be found a variety of stringed
instruments, horns, flutes and xylophones, which together reveal a broader
base to the African musical heritage. Is it to these regions that any African ”
=
' |
|

--- Page 15 ---
|
| 52 * SAVANNAH SYNCOPATORS 53 * MUSIC ©
je ! retentions in jazz can be traced? And, bearing in mind the combinations may als
; of lutes, harps and fiddles, are there any links with the blues and its latter m
antecedents to be found here? utation
y It is probably true to say that nearly all African peoples have stringed are emp
instruments of some kind, but in those of the tropical rain forest they famous
generally play a very small part in the musical expression of the people. to anv e
The ‘musical bow’, which is the ordinary hunting bow plucked as a mu- or other
: sical instrument, is to be found in most hunting societies, and there is a slaves at
curious combination of bows, where each string has a separate stem, that nomadi
together make the so-called ‘West African harp’. Belly-harps and belly- of the g
lyres, with single strings held in tension across a bow fitted with a gourd of their
resonator, are also frequently found. With the cup of the resonator placed toire co
against the stomach, they can be played by plucking or with a bow-string. custom
Lyres are common, with the horns carrying a crosspiece to which the of the n
| strings are attached, but monochords plucked, bowed or picked with a tions, o1
plectrum, and similar chordophones with two, three or more strings are a “prof
even more familiar. In addition there are large harps and plucked lutes: praises 1
some of the former, with as many as a score of strings on which extremely ages the
complex music can be played, are to be found in the western parts of like mat
the savannah regions. To the ear attuned to blues it is the manner of sums of
playing that impresses, with the moaned and wailing notes of the bowed substan
| instruments, the rapid fingering of the lutes and harps, and the combined Gene
interweaving of melodic-rhythmic lines when two or more musicians play of older
together, offering some remarkable comparisons. The pentatonic and and unc
heptatonic scales often used by many of the savannah peoples do not ity of tr
preclude the inflections and shadings that come from rising to hit the are expe
notes, relaxing tension on the strings, or drawing the bow across them of a trib
to make immediate parallels with the ‘blue notes’ — diminished thirds totally f
and sevenths — familiar in blues and jazz. gain the
In the African countries where Islam has had a powerful influence and they are
where chiefs exert considerable authority, much of the music-making and det
is the province of the griots. These are traditional musicians who are he has t
employed as individuals, or in pairs, or even in very large groups and the abil
orchestras. In many savannah societies the griots are professional musi- passing
cians, but in some ~ as in Senegal — they are part-time entertainers and history 1

i

--- Page 16 ---
7
| !
53 © MUSIC IN WEST AFRICA |
nations may also be farmers, fishermen or follow some other occupation. The
- and its latter may be attached to a village and may have only a small, local rep-
utation as song makers and instrumentalists, but in many regions the griots
stringed are employed by the sultans, emirs, chiefs or headmen. Others — the most |
rest they famous — are free-ranging groups of professional musicians, unattached |
- people. to any employer, who hire their services out to families, groups of workers '
3s a mu- or others who wish to hear and temporarily employ them. Many griots were , |
ere is a slaves at one time and some, technically, still are. But the freely travelling,
rem, that nomadic griots are totally independent and proud of it. ‘The musical arts |
-d belly- of the griots, wrote Tolia Nikiprowetzky when introducing a collection
a gourd of their recordings in Niger, ‘is rich and varied. The basis of their reper- :
_r placed toire consists of songs of praise: the griot is attached to a chief and by
w-string. custom flaunts the qualities of his master and perpetuates the memory |
nich the of the members of his family who have preceded him in his ruling func-
d with a tions, or have singled themselves out by their efforts. When attached to
vings are a “professional body” (cultivators, fishermen, butchers, etc.) the griot |
<d lutes; praises the achievements of some members of the profession and encour- , |
xtremely ages the efforts of the workers.’ The griots play for important occasions |
parts of like marriages, circumcisions and the like, and leave with considerable
‘anner of sums of money. It is stated that one celebrated griot in Senegal has a more
-e bowed substantial income than the highest-paid officials in the country.
ombined Generally, indeed almost invariably, the griots are the sons and nephews | |
“ans play of older griots, their role being hereditary. They are taught by their fathers
onic and and uncles and are trained over many years to learn the enormous quant-
-s do not ity of traditional songs and to master the melodies and rhythms which |
+ hit the are expected of them. A griot is required to sing on demand the history
ass them of a tribe or family for seven generations and, in particular areas, to be
ed thirds totally familiar with the songs of ritual necessary to summon spirits and
gain the sympathy of the ancestors. Some of the griots are women, though
-ence and they are generally the wives of the male singers, and they gather gossip |
--making and details which the griot may incorporate into his songs. For though |
who are. he has to know many traditional songs without error he also must have
sups and : the ability to extemporise on current events, chance incidents and the |
-al musi- | passing scene. Their wit can be devastating and their knowledge of local |
‘ners and} history formidable. As Curt Sachs noted, ‘they importune the rich with
|
|

--- Page 17 ---
to
+
od S4 * SAVANNAH SYNCOPATORS 55 « MUS
| either glorification or insults depending on whether their victims are open-
handed or stingy. They often roam from village to village in gangs of
about a dozen under a chief who is at the same time a seasoned historian
- and genealogist and knows to the last details the alliances, hostilities and 3
conflicts that unite or oppose the families and villages of the country.’
This puts the griots in a position of some power; they blackmail their
listeners with their ridicule and are feared and despised for it, while being
admired for their skill. The attitude of their audiences is ambivalent, t
for while they fear being the butt of their humour they want to hear the qt
gossip and news they purvey, and listen to their music. \
Arabic has been adopted by the learned among the cultures of the savan- J
nah regions and the Muslim schools have brought a degree of literacy. -
But it is primarily an oral culture and hence the griot plays an important
role within it. He has a stock-in-trade of songs and words, he has a
| standard available repertoire of tunes, but he is also an innovator and a
manipulator. He fits new words to old musical themes, models old phrases 4
into new ideas, and rather than being a perpetuator of attitudes is, as -
. Nikiprowetzky has pointed out, in Senegal at any rate, an instrument for Or th
social change. Nevertheless, these are slowly moving societies and the singit
griots have been established for many centuries, and may well continue Amor
: to be. Their position in the society is an ambiguous one: both privileged the &
i and un-privileged. They can acquire large fortunes and as the custom the (i
of giving and receiving gifts is prevalent among savannah peoples, with calab:
‘giving’ gathering the higher esteem, the griot is often the recipient of string
gifts from his master. But they are a caste apart, as André Jolivet has vibrat
explained, ‘the last in the hierarchy with the smiths, the rope-makers and string
the weavers’. Among many tribes who venerate the earth and whose ances- wet u
tors are intimately associated with them, the interment of a griot would So
be a desecration. Instead of being buried, therefore, their bodies are placed and p
upright in the trunks of hollow baobab trees and allowed to putrefy. more
In the pursuit of the profession, many griots achieve remarkable stand- orche
ards of virtuosity. The players of the great harp-lute, called the kora, for those
instance, combine melodic inventiveness with subtle and constantly which
moving rhythms, plucking the twenty-one strings of their instrument with empleo
the thumbs, while steadying their hands on two projecting wood horns. stant
|

--- Page 18 ---
|
| |
55 ¢ MUSIC IN WEST AFRICA L
nen- 2 ib a BF /
s of i Ne a N
clan | oF eo “fi 4 |
. Oe |
wry. ? eg:
“eit : . , a 4 y os
eing x Z @ 4 j |
‘ent, ff OM yy
- the ee wf -— |
| yn? & oY 3
as a es
i a ~ FS 11 Jali Nyama Suso of Gambia, playing
—e dl lt ae the 21-string kora, London, 1972
Sy as ! ‘
= tor Or they may play a ground bass and play intricate patterns over it while
| the } singing in a third layer a praise song, or improvised market-place satire.
le Among the Mandingo sub-tribe of the Malinke, the seron, a variant of |
ered the kora with nineteen strings, is equally popular, while, in the Gambia, |
om the bulumbata offers a further variant. Made like the others from a huge
with calabash and covered with a skin, it has a curving arm which carries the |
ne ie strings and which terminates in a metal plate festooned with rings that q
‘Has vibrate with every touch of the strings. These instruments have their
y and strings held in place by tuning rings, or leather loops, which are slid when _—
Mees wet up the shaft of the arm and allowed to tighten on drying. a
rule Some bands of griots comprise a large number of musicians, singers |
wee \ and praise-shouters — sometimes as many as twenty. But five or six is |
by ' more usual and trios, or pairs, of musicians very common. In the larger |
and- | orchestras there are many kinds of instrument; or alternatively there are |
he those which have a large assembly of a single type — drums or horns — j
as which are played for particular functions only. Some of the techniques
pete. employed are unusual, such as the calabash drum whose tones are con- |
“aie stantly varied by piling up or clearing sand away from the bowl which | ,
|
i

--- Page 19 ---
56 * SAVANNAH SYNCOPATORS 7 * VlSo*. E87:
| is half immersed in it. Others show the borrowings of instrumental Though tre Ser
: techniques from nearby peoples: the floating calabashes of the ‘Tuareg occasion xnecrr

for example. Rhythms are important in the music of the griots, but, as However the :-

Nikiprowetzky has observed, ‘Contrary to the usual belief that African sounded, ané --

music is above all rhythm and percussion, we have observed “melody the singer.”

lines” which spontaneously spring to life and unfold according to their own Further wes: :

internal nature without being subjected to any rhythmic straightjacket.’ as the geires. nce:

It is hard to generalise about a musical culture and tradition which is status is beluv -

shared by so many tribes over so vast a region. The griots’ orchestras are leather workers .

numerous and there is evidence of their increasingly widening influence. and the desceré

Writing in 1931, William Seabrook noted the presence of griots among ways as untoue=.

the Dan and Guere of the Ivory Coast rain forest. ‘These are a special members of «zn.

class’ he wrote, ‘and divide further into two separate specialized functions. But, wrote D:-:

One type of griot is like the subsidized poet or minstrel who was attached the public tor =
| to a European Court in the Middle Ages. He is an improvising singer, farmers and en7:
i shouter, orator, whose duty is to flatter and glorify his master. The virtuosos amor 2
second type of griot corresponds even more precisely to the medieval king’s have a reputat!:-

jester. He is a comic fellow to whom every outrageous licence is permitted.’ ever, are not m:

His reports and photographs reveal that the griots did not accompany instruments the -

themselves on stringed instruments, or apparently on any musical instru- of all Wolof ins

ment at all. Thirty years later, Hugo Zemp explained that, in general, has hide stretc=:

: any Dan might play an instrument and that ‘any one of the boys can by leather tunixz
learn to play the drum or transverse trumpet. In contrast to these non- on the resonator.

professionals, the musicians of the Malinke (the neighbouring tribe in forefinger and t>

the North) belong to a professional caste of musicians. Some of these their fingernails -

griots have settled with the Dan and live near the headmen as musicians used to strike the

and leather workers.’ Contact with the Malinke was evident in other ways: strings are stopp

“The Northern Dan of the Savannah have adopted the Malinke practice frets. The three

of maintaining permanent hunting groups, and also the musical instru- are plucked in .

ment which the hunters take with them, the ko (hunter’s harp). This hazarding the gu

instrument has six or seven strings, arranged in two parallel rows.’ Hugo the American ba:

Zemp also found the six-stringed harp-lute among the Senufo whose lands ployed in Senega.

are in the savannah region. They had ‘undoubtedly taken over the harp- ‘banjar’. Known

lute from their Western neighbours, the Malinke. Among the latter it is der Musikinstrun:

called koni and played by hunters, also to the accompaniment of iron rasps.’ transported to \

|

--- Page 20 ---
"
57 * MUSIC IN WEST AFRICA :
{ |
Though the Senufo hunters wore similar attire and played rasps, ‘on no ‘
occasion known to us was the principal singer able to play the harp-lute. |
However the instrument is always carried about and although never
sounded, and perhaps for this very reason, has a special significance for |
the singer.’ L |
Further west among the Wolof of Senegal and Gambia the griots, known
as the gemel, occupy a lowly social position, as Sachs has observed. Their
status is below that of the descendants of the slaves of blacksmiths and
leather workers and the praise-singers, minstrels, jesters and musicians,
and the descendants of their slaves (jam i gewe/) ‘are regarded in some
ways as untouchables: they cannot be buried in the village graveyard, and =
members of other classes will not eat with them out of the same dish’.
But, wrote David Ames, ‘despite the pretence of laziness presented to
the public for business purposes, most of the geme/ are hardworking
farmers and entertainers. They take pride in their artistic abilities, and
virtuosos among them are recognized by the whole community and often '
have a reputation beyond it.’ Drums are used by the Wolof; these, how-
ever, are not made by them but by Fulbe woodcarvers. Among string )
instruments the most frequently employed and one of the most favoured | |
of all Wolof instruments is the five-stringed halam. A hollowed wood body =
has hide stretched over it to form a resonator and the strings are fixed _
by leather tuning thongs to the rounded neck and stretched over a bridge , |
on the resonator. “The strings are plucked by the fingernail of the thumb,
forefinger and the middle finger of the right hand, and the gewel keep a
their fingernails long for this purpose. Occasionally all of the fingers are |
used to strike the resonator as in flamenco guitar-playing. The two longest | )
strings are stopped with the fingers of the left hand without the aid of =
frets. The three shorter strings are not stopped but are left “open” and
are plucked in constant pitch’, Ames has explained, understandably a.
hazarding the guess that the alam ‘may have been the “grandfather” of
the American banjo’. A similar African lute with a gourd bow! also em- 7
ployed in Senegal has, too, been considered to be the source of Jefferson’s
‘banjar’. Known as the bania, as Curt Sachs has noted in Reallexikon a
der Musikinstrumente, not only its form but even its name may have been _
transported to North America. Certainly it is not hard to believe that |
t

--- Page 21 ---
¢
i
ot
>
58 * SAVANNAH SYNCOPATORS SE # 8.
aS SE RR a a RE ~, ey are L
: Ge Wi Se ere) b - , Prenrecze ; - . ; ay 3° — f -
: i ane Pee oes i . i o te tee oe
a : ye ee ee ‘ ” | ee | & oh E a
ia ee Kf oe a * ee” erg al Sc
vs fe eee ys) a ee p eigpmatat merc 2x ees ie ae - . ’ ates
cy / ype | " 4 ee ae ke : ” t S pa ae TT.
i § ae ll (it E " i! " a qe
rie. 9 i 4 ee Mo i fascia
ee Ee ed ig see 0: ng ee Geet a ee an.
Pe ME Lz aS, wee p ae) ee a
pd gg) / ee AN \ ; s dri
—- ||. eee FF eee :
i “ et o 2a lS a at te, 2 Ninn 2 ictal eee sae ile ie ee 3
th. \ are
a | 12 Griots playing a halam duet, Senegal de:
7 | Wh
if the tradition which shaped the music of the halam and the bania was the As
iy
4 progenitor of the music of such teams as Frank Stokes and Dan Sane or the
q ! . . . .
" the Georgia Browns, when listening to two professional gewel each play- An
“ ing the halam in a rapidly moving, cross-rhythmic performance. Wit
In the Hausa regions of northern Nigeria, 1,500 miles to the east of att
the Senegambia, instruments of a similar kind are played for bori rituals abl
and ceremonies and on the hunt. The komo is a two-stringed lute with me
a bowl made sometimes out of a calabash, sometimes out of a section of of
hollowed wood like the halam. A strip of metal with vibrating rings inserted ‘tal
around it is to be found on one komo in my possession; another has no of |
vibrator. These instruments are played with a pick or plectrum of rhino- are
ceros hide and are found deep in the Republic of Niger where groups orc
of as many as six griots play extremely large instruments, some nearly two me
metres long, called garaya. Among the Hausa of Nigeria the kukuma fiddle hor
is also used to accompany praise songs. Horsehair is laid in a band to are
provide a single ‘string’ and the instrument is plaved with a long horse- imi
hair bow. Groups of musicians also play a larger form, the goge, while pra
; i
: 1

--- Page 22 ---
a
_
| 59 * MUSIC IN WEST AFRICA
in Niger the goge (or gogué) is played by both solo singers and bands of _
j griots. Though the distribution map of these instruments is complex, and |
| the variations of the lutes and fiddles may have differing numbers of |
| strings, like the long-armed gouroumi of Niger with its three strings but
marked proportional similarity to the banjo, their widespread use over
| many countries and thousands of miles of savannah territory is without
i question.
Across the savannah belt drum orchestras among the griofs, using drums
for weddings, funerals and other ceremonies, for the praise of the chiefs |
and to accompany particular forms of work, are common, even if they |
| are not as prevalent as in the rain forest. Tension drums, large calabash |
+ drums and small drums of skins stretched across potsherds are all to be |
i found. But trumpets and horns are also found in many griot orchestras
. \ and in the bands maintained by the chiefs, headmen and emirs. The long
| Hausa trumpet, the kakaki, the so-called single reed oboe known as the —
i algaita and many other kinds of horn with flat disc mouthpieces, slen- a
der reeds, bodies of wood or bamboo and bells of tin or other metal are
widely distributed. Much has been written of the ‘talking drums’ of the i
Ashanti and the Yoruba with the assumption made that in some way a
| the vocalising techniques have been transferred to wind instruments in the |
a Americas. It would seem that the influence could have been far more direct |
, with a clear retention of savannah practice. Tolia Nikiprowetzky has drawn |
attention to the virtuosity of the players of the Béri-Béri algaita who are | |
able with ‘an ingenious system of phonetic equivalents to transmit virtual _
‘ messages which the initiated can translate with ease’. The Béri-Béri 1
. of Niger use similar instruments to the Hausa who employ the use of j
‘talking’ techniques widely. David Ames recorded a Fanfare for the Sultan ]
of Sokoto who is ‘senior to all the Emirs and appropriately his musicians a
! are the most expert and proud of all the court musicians’, The court
orchestra included three kakaki long trumpets, three algaita, two double
membrane drums with snares (gangan na sarki) and five medium-length |
horns of the farai type. ‘Though there is no singing, all the instruments
are “talking”’, Ames emphasised. On wind instruments it is possible for
imitations to approximate the sounds of speech and song, but this is only |
practicable on the drums with ‘pitch and tone’ languages like Twi (Ashanti) |
| ;
. |

--- Page 23 ---
60 * SAVANNAH SYNCOPATORS

| or Yoruba. As Wolof is not a tone language the members of the Wolof

tribe do not use this technique, and neither do other language groups

which do not share this characteristic, though some employ communicative

rhythms much as a bugler may sound a ‘reveille’, or a drummer sound

‘retreat’.

4 + SAVANN
Far to the no:
try from the
| They have m
| of a kind mos
| Black Volta, \
| have devised
the savannah
rectangular hi
become areas
pound. When
balls up to th
the sun and 1
catching and
Their prin
a gil by the L
phones. The |
a frame struct
the slats, whic
gourds to am
on their surtz
holes made it
many of then
for the Lobi h
from the gil. (
