--- Page 1 ---
King of the Blues
Author(s): Jerry Richardson, Rob Bowman and B. B. King
Source: The Black Perspective in Music, 1989, Vol. 17, No. 1/2 (1989), pp. 135-152
Published by: Professor J. Southern (Managing Editor-Publisher)
Stable URL: |https://www.jstor.org/stable/1214747
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Black Perspective in

eC OI Music

oes

Eb

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 2 ---
CONVERSATION with
B. B. King:
: ”
“King of the Blues
BY JERRY RICHARDSON AND ROB BOWMAN

ILEY “B. B.” KING has made his mark in the blues world as a
Rex innovator and unique blues-guitar stylist. His strong

determination to continuously improve his technique and
enlarge his repertory has assured him success and earned him the
well-deserved sobriquet King of the Blues.

Paradoxically, King was given this long-overdue recognition
only after several of his early recordings had animated a group of
blues-rock guitarists in the late 1960s—Mike Bloomfield, Elvin
Bishop, and Eric Clapton, among others—who proclaimed public-
ly that he was their mentor and inspiration, that he was the greatest
living blues-guitarist. King also had had moderate influence in the
1950s on the style development of several black blues guitarists,
including “Magic” Sam Maghett, “Buddy” Guy, and Albert King.

The casual listener may gain only a glimpse of the talented B. B.
King. The student who takes the time, however, to carefully
scrutinize and analyze King’s style will find it to be of great com-
plexity, and will realize that his technique serves to enhance and
verify his uniqueness and his stature as a blues performer.

Like most of the bluesmen of the Mississippi Delta, King was
raised in impoverished circumstances. Born Riley B. King, 16 Sep-
tember 1925, on a plantation near Indianola in northwest Mis-
sissippi, he was the eldest of three sisters and a brother. His mother
died when he was only nine years old, and he subsequently
bounced around from one family to another, although he resided
most of the time with his maternal grandmother, a sharecropper.
After completing the ninth grade, he left home and settled in In-
dianola, where he worked as a tractor driver by day and sang and
played guitar on street corners on weekends.

In 1944 King lived for a short time in Memphis, Tennessee,
with his cousin “Bukka” White, a noted, Delta bottle-neck guitarist.
In 1948 King found employment with a blues group in West Mem-
phis, Arkansas, which played on radio station KWEM. Soon
thereafter he became a disc jockey and had his own show on the

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 3 ---
136 THE BLACK PERSPECTIVE IN MUSIC

newly formed radio station WDIA in Memphis. It was during this
time that he acquired the title Beale Street Blues Boy (later con-
tracted to “B. B.”).

King began recording in 1949 and produced his first hit,
“Three O’Clock Blues,” in 1951. Over his long career of almost
forty years, he has produced more than thirty albums and over 130
singles; he has appeared on numerous talk shows, television spe-
cials, and radio programs; has done many television commercials;
and has made several global concert tours. He is the recipient of
two honorary doctorates and a plethora of national music awards.
He is indeed King of the Blues. Despite his performing demands,
however, King has found time to actively engage in civil-rights and
humanitarian work, such as prison reform.

In the following interview B. B. King offers insight into his evo-
lution as a performer/musician and the development of his guitar
technique. We also learn of the myriad sources and influences that
have contributed to his diversified style and how he perceives him-
self as a blues performer, guitar stylist, and songwriter.

This interview took place on 7 June 1986 at Natchez, Mis-
sissippi.

* * * *

Richardson and Bowman: We should like to cover several areas in
our questioning. One question has to do with influences: we want to get very
specific in terms of what you picked up from individual people. We want to
talk about your guitar playing as it has changed over the years. You’ve
mentioned your aunt and her records many times in various interviews; we
want to know more about her influence on you during your formative years.
At what age did you first begin to visit her?

B. B. King: About five or six. I was around her until [I was]
about twelve or thirteen, maybe.

Had anything else captured your musical interest, or was she really the
first one that got you interested in music?

I think that [my interest in music] came almost like an in-
heritance, because when I learned to talk and learned to know any-
body other than my mother, people were singing and playing
guitars around me. I think I was interested in [music] long before I
ever thought I would try to become professional at it myself. So I
would think that mostly it was just something I grew into—in other
words, just like here I am, and the music is here already. If that
makes sense.

Certainly. The sounds you said surrounded you, [were they] both
blues and gospel music?

Blues and gospel, some country, and a little jazz—it was mostly
gospel. In the area in the Mississippi Delta where I was born, there
was a lot of white people around that sang country music, so the

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 4 ---
B. B. KING 137
ea.
. c } 4 oa
c it oe F GE
a
ait
- i...
«
" RF
a
>
Led
> a Me ~
ts x ee a J
‘i 4,

ae

i - }

hk x oe Lo a

} Vv a |
S ae ,
os “ay
a

B. B. King. Courtesy of the Institute of Jazz Studies.
This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 5 ---
138 THE BLACK PERSPECTIVE IN MUSIC

blacks would sing gospel and blues. Not all of them sang blues, but
I mean the majority would sing gospel. Some sang blues, and a few
would sing country, and jazz was just starting to kind of come in a
little bit. Well, all of the whites sang gospel, some would sing coun-
try, and a few would sing blues. So it was kind of like a balanced
type of thing. But everybody sang gospel, because down there
there were a lot of religious people—at least, you thought they
were. I learned some of it and liked all of it.

But growing up, my aunt (not the aunt that used to buy the
records, but her sister) was the one that I lived with a lot of times,
and was around and influenced by quite a bit, along with my moth-
er until she passed. They were very religious; no blues was sang
around them. You would get smacked in the mouth if you did so.
You had to sing gospel, so you got a lot of training, a lot of rehears-
als.

Whether you preferred it or not, that’s the way tt went?

It had to be gospel.

What about the aunt with the record collection?

She collected records, yes. I think she did it just for her own
amusement.

Just like anybody buying records?

Right. Like I do today.

Sure. When people have asked you about her [records|—you often
mention Jam Gates, Lonnie Johnson, and Blind Lemon Jefferson.

Those were the ones that I liked.

O.K. What I am trying to get at is how extensive was her collection, how
many records were you getting to hear? Did she have fifty records, 200
records?

She wasn’t wealthy, so she wouldn’t have a whole lot of records.
I imagine she probably would have had seventy-five or eighty, may-
be even a hundred. But not any more.

That ts clearly a large collection of 78s for the time.

Yes, because like kids are today, she would buy records for her
own amusement. And she couldn’t know about the new hits—the
new release that one might know about today—because there was
no radio playing. There was no Billboard showing the next release
of blues tunes. So when she would go to the little town, she would
have had to inquire—you know, what’s new, or whom. And so I
would think maybe she would buy a new record maybe each time
she went to town on the weekends, if she could afford it.

Considering the fact there was no blues on the radio back then, was
radio important at all to your development as a musician?

The time we are talking about now, the time when I was five or
six years old, I [had] never heard a radio. I heard about them, but
never heard one.

When would you say you first heard radio, about what age?

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 6 ---
B. B. KING 139

About ten or eleven. My boss had one, but all I ever heard most
times then was [when] my boss lady used to listen to Stella Dallas
while I was working around the house.

I am curious as to exactly which country influences were absorbed into
your playing?

I listened to Gene Autry, and I listened to Jimmy Rogers and
Roy Acuff. Most of the country stars I was around then, I was able
to hear them on the radio later. My boss had [recordings of] coun-
try players like Hank Snow, and I could go on and name quite a
few that was popular at that time.

Were there specific things or songs of theirs that you would later in-
corporate into your playing?

I didn’t do it intentionally. My first books that I used—I used to
order them from Sears Roebuck—when I was trying to learn to
play guitar—. I would get these country tunes in these guitar books
{and] I was learning country even when I didn’t intend to. Those
books had mostly country songs, like “My Darlin’ Clementine,”
“You’re My Sunshine,” “Walking the Floor Over You.‘

So you learned a number of songs in the country repertoire?

Yes, that is the way I learned to read music in the beginning,
because most of the songs—. I think they had “Green Eyes” and a
few other popular songs like that. [They] were country songs. So I
learned to read them before I could play “Three O’Clock Blues.”

When you were singing on the street corners in Indianola and people
would request songs, were they just requesting blues, or did they request pop
songs and country?

Anything that might be popular at that time was being re-
quested, but mostly it would be gospel songs because, as I said to
you earlier, most of the people in the little towns and suburban
areas usually were very church-going people. A guy that was
known to be as I was—a gospel singer quite active in the church—if
I was caught by my church members [singing the blues], I would
have been scolded about it. Maybe even almost like in the Army—
“written up.” But, usually the ones that I would come in contact
with would be people that thought or lived similar to my own way
of life—which means, you won’t tell on me and I won’t tell on you.

When you did get pop or country requests, could you virtually play most
of the hits of the day in all styles.

That is the one disadvantage I’ve always had—I have never
been able to play anybody’s tune as it was supposed to be played,
[not] even my own. I’ve always been, if there is any such thing as
being, an original. The way I hear a song usually is a little bit
different from [the way it was] written, unless it is on paper. If it is
on paper and I am trying to play it, I would naturally read it as it is.
I have never yet been able to sing a song as the author wished it to
be sung, because that is where the originality comes in.

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 7 ---
140 THE BLACK PERSPECTIVE IN MUSIC

It is not because I am trying to be—. This is the way I hear
something, the way only B. B. King hears it. Like, if I do a com-
mercial—.I’ve done several commercials, one for Coca Cola, one
for Anhauser Busch Beer Company, one for Frito Lay. Where I am
supposed to follow the script or the melodic line as laid out, [I
don’t]; but they always wind up saying that it’s B. B. King, so go
ahead (laughs). I guess maybe they kind of pet me a little bit in
some ways, but they seem to get the best work out of me when they
allow me to be myself.

What was the role of your guitar when you were playing on the street
corners? Were you accompanying your singing with chords?

Even then I would [first] sing and then play; play and then sing.
I’ve never been able to actually accompany myself with chords like
a guitarist would do. We use the words “to frail along the guitar,”
which means just strum it. I can do that, but to properly play the
chords—. No, it just never happened. In fact, it don’t happen to-
day.

"That makes sense. One is an extension of the other.

That is the way I hear it.

When you were playing on street corners and frailing or strumming, so
to speak, you would literally sing a capella, and then play a guitar response?

No, I strum it. But I may not play the proper chords is what I’m
saying. But after the melodic line leaves the lips, the serious part
starts on the guitar. And then the facial expression takes over as if
it is the guitar being strummed. In other words, it leaves from here
and goes here (gesturing towards his face). When I am serious sing-
ing the melody, then I am strumming the guitar, which is not very
serious. After I stop singing, I am singing through the guitar.

That's interesting. And it actually makes sense, based on the way I’ve
seen you play.

It’s not something I am trying to do; it’s almost like the exorcist.

You say that whenever you learn songs, you have always done it in the
B. B. King way, you haven't been able to reproduce exactly what was on a
record. Did you ever try to learn specifically from records, especially your
guitar playing? Did you ever try to learn recordings note-for-note, like a lot
of young people learn?

Yes, I did. That is what turned me out to be the B. B. King that
I am now, because I could never play like anybody else. I guess I

Just can’t hear, and [I] have stupid fingers that just don’t work.

For somebody who can’t hear and has stupid fingers, it works incredibly
well.

Well, what I am saying is, I would listen to T-Bone Walker, I
listened to Blind Lemon, I listened to Lonnie Johnson, I listened to
all of these people that I loved. And if I could have played identi-
cally like [any] one [of them], I would have, but it just never came
out. I have never been able to do it. I guess that is one of the rea-
sons why I have kept a group with me all the time, because I have

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 8 ---
B. B. KING 14]
never, even from the beginning, even now—unless I’ve got an
arrangement on it musically where I could study it—I’ve never
been able to do it. Somehow it just doesn’t come out.

But I see young kids today and, Man, they are playing note-for-
note what George Benson would play or what Chet Atkins would
play. But I personally have never been able to do it. Now, maybe a
lot of that is laziness on my own part. Maybe. I never put enough
initiative into it to try. A lot of times, I have heard people say, “I
sure would like to play guitar,” and I say to myself, “If you would
really try, you could.” Maybe I have gone about it in the wrong way
or [have] not put enough effort [in it]—could have been either—I
am not sure, but I know that I tried.

Maybe B. B. wouldn’t have evolved the way he did if you had done that.

That is possible, too.

T-Bone Walker is great, but instead of having a second T-Bone Walker
in the world, the world did better by getting a B. B. King.

Well, thank you. But, if I could have played like him note-for-
note, I would have.

About the age of eighteen, when you were playing street corners, were
you playing single-string lead responses at that point?

Not as I do now. I was just starting to, because at that time I
wasn’t into T-Bone Walker as I later learned to try to be. It was
then more a Lonnie Johnson or Blind Lemon effort, or Lowell
Fulson even. He was one of the guys I idolized as well. It was a lot
of the guitar players—my cousin, Bukka White. But I never could
play with a slide—I still can’t—so I didn’t go too much in that direc-
tion.

Lonnie Johnson was my number-one person—he and Blind
Lemon, because of something they had. Now I could also extract
from many other people a bit of what I was feeling from Blind
Lemon or what I felt from Lonnie Johnson. So that is how I could
easily incorporate Charlie Christian and Django Reinhardt [in my
playing]—even though they were far-advanced jazz musicians. It
was that certain little something, that certain little sound, that cer-
tain little feeling that seemed to be kind of like a sword that went
straight through me right through here.

You mean the magic hit?

Yes, that is the way [it hit me].

There really is that magic in some of their music. You must have really
had a high when you first listened to Django and Charlie Christian?

Oh, God, yes! But I started to feel then something that they
were doing quite often, because I am jazz-oriented, I guess. I don’t
try to play it publicly, because I don’t think I play it that well, but I
enjoy getting in a jam session. Like, last night we had a kind of jam
session, and I really enjoyed it because I was able to improvise—

Just got turned loose.
This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 9 ---
142 THE BLACK PERSPECTIVE IN MUSIC

But in most cases, [when] I [go] on stage, usually with a group,
there is an audience there, everybody is going to say, “Oh, Man,
play “The Thrill Is Gone,’ play so-and-so”; and so I am never
allowed to actually be myself. And when I say be myself, don’t get
me wrong. Sure, there is nothing I enjoy playing better than a good
slow-down and dirty one [i.e, blues]. I like that because it is kind of
like talking—I am not very good at talking, my diction and every-
thing else is terrible. To try and say,” I am B. B. King,” it takes a
whole lot, really. But I can do that through the guitar, playing slow
things. A long time ago I learned that my speed was not good, so I
decided to play economy for speed.

To opt for slower blues?

Yes. One picture is worth a thousand words. So, [for] me, one
good note [put] where it should be put, will say what it will take
some people many notes to say. I hope I’m making sense.

You do. And that 1s reflected in your guitar sounds. It is all so ironic
when you think of the trend within rock circles, which is to play a million
notes a minute. It was “the fastest guitars in the West”—espectally in the
late sixties and early seventies. And many of those people who were heavily
blues-influenced would say that you were one of their prime influences. Yet
you were never that sort of guitarist. I heard the women mention Son Seals
to you earlier. He is much more a player who plays in that style. I believe a
younger generation of Chicago players do that because of the influence of
rock, but ut has always been different with your playing.

You mentioned tunes lke “Stormy Monday” by T-Bone Walk-
er. Is there any specific thing you learned from that tune?

Yes, that nobody else can play it like him [laughs]. He starts
off—I have a copy of the original—and he plays twelve bars first,
which sets it up, kind of like a pitcher on a great ball team that sets
up the batter. Well, T-Bone Walker did that to me with the first
twelve bars of “Stormy Monday.” He set me up—I let the melody
do it. I am here on the edge of my seat, [and] he kept me like this
the whole three minutes or so of what he’s [playing].

Anytime a person gets my attention like that, I couldn’t sit here
and be writing a letter, or sit here and talk to you and continue
listening to that. I got to listen to it. You know, as we are talking
now, the conversation can just flow. It is kind of like a rhythm sec-
tion—a good rhythm section is playing good, and it continues like
this. Quite often I tell my group, if you are playing and you have a
rhythmic pattern going, if you keep doing that, nobody can beat
you. They just have to join you, they can’t beat you.

This is what you try to do in your tunes, too. Do you start them with a
guitar prelude?

Well, I learned a long time ago to do something jazz musicians
usually do now, and that is just play what you feel like playing.
Now, don’t worry whether this is properly played or whether the

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 10 ---
B. B. KING 143
progressions are international, but just play what you feel. There’s
another thing I'll tell my group: if we screw up, and all screw up
together, it’s right (laughing). Somebody may criticize you, but if
you do it together, it is still right because that is what you are doing.
Well, that is the way I like to play.

A lot of times people expect me to end a song properly. I may
not want to end it like that; I may [want to] hit a few more licks on it
and then end it. Of course, my group works with me. They know
what I intend to do, and we have worked together long enough
that I can signal them and say, “Hey, I got a couple of more
things.” And people in the audience, especially musicians, may
think, “What the heck is he doing?” But I am doing what I feel; I
don’t feel like it should be chopped off right then, so that is the way
I play.

And if it works, it is proper—nobody can say it isn’t.

Well, sometimes (laughing) it may not be. I tell my group I have
never made a perfect record yet, and I have never made a perfect
beginning or ending. So, it just stops whenever I tell it to.

Pll give you another thing that I rarely talk about, but I will
have to tell you this and be honest. The musician that starts off
playing alone—especially if he is a folk, country, or blues player—
usually doesn’t depend on bars to keep a rhythmic pattern going.
You hear it in most all players. I had some friends of mine to tell
me from time to time—Robert Junior Lockwood, for instance, who
was a good friend of mine. When I first met him I was playing over
in a little place called Hughes, Arkansas, not too far from West
Memphis. So I had been hearing Robert Junior and admiring him
all the time. He used to be with a guy called “Sonny Boy” William-
son [= Willie “Rice” Miller], and they used to be on radio station
KFFA in Helena, Arkansas—the King Biscuit Time Show. So this
particular night, the three of us were playing—myself on guitar, a
drummer, and a piano player. We were having a ball, and the peo-
ple were dancing; we had a little place the size of this room almost,
and Man, the people were rocking.

So, I would sing the song for ten bars before I decided to make
the change. I may stay on the “I chord” for ten bars the first time,
because I have to get that feeling going good. So, getting started off
is like [having a] heavy load, Man. So you grab that first thing you
are saying, like “Mama, the baby’s leaving,” you know. And you
stay on that until it is moving good, and then finally you change to
second gear [the IV chord]. You getting ready to come back later to
the V chord, but you’ve got to get it moving first. But if you've gota

good beat going, the people that are not trained to music aren’t
thinking nothing about the bar [i.e., the harmonic rhythm]. You
got the beat going where they can dance, [and] the melodic line is
going good. That is great; that’s all they want.
This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 11 ---
144 THE BLACK PERSPECTIVE IN MUSIC

So, when Robert Junior came in that particular night, he lis-
tened to me and tried to play with me. [But he] couldn’t follow; he
just sit there. So when the tune was over, I said, “Man, come on.”
And he says, “Man, I can’t play with you.” So I said to him, “Why?”
So he told me there is order to playing—you got to have some
order to what you are doing. And he went on to tell me about the
bars, which I had read about in my guitar books. But I had found
that, to me, the important thing wasn’t to play the songs out of the
books as they were [written], but to try to keep those people happy.
I am nota fast sight-reader, but I do read. Most of my guys are, but
I'm not; I’m the worst thing out here. Once I’ve learned a tune, I
will then have to play it as I feel it.

One of the things we wanted to ask you about was what were the specific
influences of T-Bone Walker, or Bill Jennings with the Louis Jordan Band.
Would you talk about those people, specifically about their guitar playing,
and how it affected your guitar playing—harmonically, rhythmically, tech-
nically. What sort of things did you learn? Let’s start with T-Bone.

T-Bone was very technical to me in his way of playing soulfully.
He seemed to measure each pick precisely to get exactly what he
wanted. In other words, [his tone] was not blurred, it was a good
clean tone. To me [it seemed that each of] T-Bone Walker’s tones
was carefully placed—each finger placed properly behind the fret
to get the exact tone that he was looking for. And it just seemed to
me, Man, his transmitting seemed to hit me each time where I
lived.

Now, there were others. Take, for instance, Bill Jennings: he
was very technical in some ways but then swinging in another. In
other words, he seemed to be daring—both rhythmically and tech-
nically—moreso rhythmically, because he would start a groove to
going, and then whatever it takes to keep that groove going, he
would do it. Not only was that exciting to me, but he was also a
left-handed guitarist. And, the way he played—. I only saw him a
couple of times with Louis Jordan; he seemed to get his kicks play-
ing, and I am getting mine along with him. So actually he would go
ahead and improvise where T-Bone Walker wouldn’t.

T-Bone really mapped things out for himself before he would play?

T-Bone, I like to think, played what he knew and didn’t experi-
ment. In other words, what he played had been played in his room
or was already in his head.

Bill Jennings would take more chances like jazz guitarists do today.

Oh, yes. They play it even if it ain’t right—because it is right to
them. [Jennings] seemed to be one of those people like Oscar
Peterson and a lot of other people that play what they think. Any-
thing they think, they play it.

Now, a lot of us can’t do that, and I am one. If you give me
three or four bars to think about, maybe I can get it under my
This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 12 ---
B. B. KING 145
fingers, but I don’t play everything I think. I wish I could. But, I
will hear something that leads to something, that leads to some-
thing [else], and I can follow that. So it is almost like mapping out a
road as I go. Now, if I can do that, fine. If I’ve got a good rhythm
section, and I’m able to just float along with it—in other words, not
try to keep the rhythm the way I want it myself but try to pull them,
[then] I can just play my ideas, lay out what I want as I go.

That’s what happened in “The Thrill Is Gone.” The rhythm
section seemed to just float, and they were just there. Those four
guys were like a water bed. But I have had to play a lot [of times
while] trying to pull the rhythm section. I hate to do it, but in a lot
of cases, I think it has helped to give me a sense of rhythmic timing,
or stops, or syncopation, that have helped me even when I didn’t
want it to. A lot of time I would be angry.

I have seen you at times on stage, where it appears you want to say,
“Come on, band.”

Right, that kind of thing! I tell my nephew, who’s my con-
ductor, when he is writing, “You don’t write things simply because
you can play it, because everybody may not be up on the instru-
ment as well as you are. Someone else may have a problem with it.”

Simplicity, to me, rules. Now, you can get a guy started, and
then you bring him up to what you want. So, when I am playing
even now with my own group, and some of the guys have been with
me eight years, we still have some tunes some nights where I feel
the need to kind of bring them together. I like to think that I’m the
kind [of musician] that brings everybody together. Sometime I will
go to the horn section, go to the rhythm section, and then I will
look at them all, and this is my way—like a mother hen getting
everybody to come on, not to play any harder, but [to play]
together. And that is usually the way I wind up a lot of nights. The
group is a great group—the best band I have had. They want to
play and love to play, but I can see why you have a conductor stand-
ing in front of an orchestra.

Maybe this would be a good time to talk about your conception of solos.
We were talking about T-Bone having everything mapped out before he hit
a stage. What about you? When you are up on stage, when you record, how
much ts worked out and how much are you improvising?

When I record, everything is improvised. I never play anything
that I planned to play.

So if you are doing a seventh take on—. Whether it’s “Back To The
Night” or “The Thrill Is Gone?”

I play exactly what I feel then. I am not going to go too far out
on the limb to record. I am not going to go too far out on the limb
to play tonight. I will try to play from feeling. So, tonight when I
play from feeling, I will never hardly screw up because I am only
playing what I feel. Now, I don’t feel the same way every night, and

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 13 ---
146 THE BLACK PERSPECTIVE IN MUSIC
I don’t feel the same way every day, so that in itself kind of polices
me. It keeps me from playing the same thing all the time.

A lot of times people will say, and I’ve heard some of the critics
say, “I know what B. B. is going to do, I just don’t know what order
he is going to play it in.” But if they are real critical and check out
what I have done, they will find it was different, because I never
feel the same way. Nobody does. You may feel good, but if you
define good, what is good today, and what is good tomorrow? How
do you feel then? Was it just good or extra good? So, what I have to
do, other than being a musician trying to satisfy my audiences, is be
pretty good at being a programmer, to be able to keep the people
happy today compared with the people yesterday. So if you will
listen tonight, you will find that I will do a fast tune, a slow tune or
in-between tune, and another. And you will find that if you really
dissect that, you will find a new tune, an old one, and one in-
between. And that is how I manage to make it.

Now I think when someone asked me earlier about my success,
this is one thing I forgot to mention. I try to play songs according to
the situation. Certain tunes I wouldn’t play to this audience, I
would play to that audience. I am not talking about black or white,
I am talking about the audience itself, or the place where I am
playing. I wouldn’t go to Carnegie Hall now and try to play “Misty”
or “Stardust” without playing “Three O’Clock Blues.” But the
point is, I would be careful about where I put “Three O’Clock
Blues,” and I would be careful about how I tried to play “Stardust,”
because I don’t play it all the time.

I feel that the people that come to hear me at Carnegie Hall
would be some of the same people that would come to hear me in
Fayette [Mississippi]. But there are some that are not familiar with
me, so I would try to not bore the people that have been with me all
the time by playing something that they haven’t heard me play.
And then, of course, I would try to introduce myself to the people
that are not familiar with me at all.

I noticed a tremendous difference in your playing when I first moved to
Memphis. I saw you at Club Paradise, at Sunbeam’s Fiftieth Anniversary,
and I have seen you many times in Toronto at Massey Hall, and there is a
tremendous difference.

But, if you had went down to the theater there in Memphis, you
would have caught me playing different. I remember a critic came
to the Apollo theater and said that I didn’t play blues at the Apollo
Theater, that I had them watered down. Well, naturally, this per-

son being a journalist, I couldn’t rebuttal, but I am saying to you
that—no, I wouldn’t play even to the same audience the same way
twice.

But, if you have gone on stage—both of you being musicians—
and played everything you knew to play, the best you could play it
This content downloaded from

128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 14 ---
B. B. KING 147
at first, what the hell are you going to do when you come back the
second time? So, what you have to do then is think in terms of
trying to make them happy a second time. So, what I’ve found is
that is the time you try to be a musician/entertainer, if you will.

I think this is what hurt some of my colleagues, some of the best
blues players we’ve ever had, because they would do the same
thing, and it don’t work. [If] you are going to have an audience—
like last night down stairs—sure, you can play one or two slow, real
bluezy things, but I could very easily see as I was playing that the
people were in the mood to “boogie.” They wanted to get out and
do something. So if you keep playing all of your best blues, the
good ones, you are going to lose them. I would rather somebody
would criticize me to the point of saying, “Well, he didn’t play here
like he did there,” and they would be right. But I still kept my
audience.

To me that is not a criticism, that ts a compliment. You can see a per-
former five times, and if it is the same show five times, why go the sixth time,
no matter how good he is. Whereas, I have seen you twenty or thirty times in
my life, and I am still not bored.

Well, I would be bored myself if I had to do the same thing—
that is one of the things about doing a Broadway show or some-
thing like that. But I have learned from some of the actors and
musicians that even though they have the same road map as we
do—. Like I play through dawn every night, more than anything
else, and if it was going to be any tune I hate to play, if I had to play
it the same way that I played it the first time I recorded it, I’d
probably jump out the window (laughing). But don’t get me wrong,
I still have the same road map. But I sing it with the energy, play it
with the energy and the feeling that I feel now, not like I did last
night, or not like I recorded it. I think that is the one thing that
keeps me from being bored; anytime I can keep myself from being
bored, I can probably make somebody else feel good.

Would you consider some of these “licks” you play to be road maps? Is
there a framework to some of your “licks?”

No, when I am playing, that is the one thing I have never limit-
ed myself to, trying to play the same thing each time I play. No.
Now, one of the things that helped me to learn more about music,
it seems to me, is believing in my mind. In other words, if I can
graph it out and see it—I learned through the Schillinger System
that when I can graph out what I want to say, then it makes more
sense to me. Basically, I can take four notes and permute them
twenty-four different ways. So, even if some of them don’t sound
good, they are still there to be used. I would pick the ones out of
those twenty-four tones that sound best to me and play them, not

Just play them simply because they are there. But I would pick the
notes that sound good to me. That I do nightly.
This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 15 ---
148 THE BLACK PERSPECTIVE IN MUSIC

I’m sure you are familiar with Charles Sawyer’s book, The Arrival of
B. B. King, regarding the use of “riffs” in various ways, or licks, or what-
ever word one wants to use. Charles Sawyer tries to make a point that there
are a couple of “riffs” that you use more often than others.

Tom (Charles) is a friend of mine. I will finish reading the book
eventually, but one of these things is that we have been friends for
quite some time, and when he started to write the book he told me
he was going to write about B. B. King the man, not the musician.
One of the things we dealt with was as long as he tells the truth in it,
I wouldn’t be worried about it.

But, what makes identity? What makes persons be themselves is
being what they are continually, as far as I am concerned. In other
words, that is who you are. Now, if I listen to the Beatles, I know it
is the Beatles because I know what they sound like. Nobody else to
me sounds like the Beatles, even the new people that are trying.
Nobody to me sounds like Elvis but Elvis. Same thing with Blind
Lemon, same thing with Memphis Lemon.

So, I would say, yes. Of course there are certain licks that I am
going to hit, because that is me—I have to do that. It’s kind of like
trying to talk to you; I say the clichés or something to try to get my
point over. I think the same way when I am on the stage. I am
carrying on a rapport with my audience. I am trying to say some-
thing to identify me. On stage, I try my very best, and I sometimes
try to describe it this way: I feel like I am on stage with long rubber
arms around a dancing partner, which is the audience, and I like to
be able to lead the audience.

When we ask you about using certain licks or riffs over again in
different ways, that is in no way a criticism. Any good musician is—. I guess
part of what we want to know is where some of them came from?

If we were going to go back to the same people I mentioned
were my idols, I am sure that some parts of that have been there all
the time. But it has grown to be such an intertwining with my own
personal feelings. When I do it I might touch upon Blind Lemon
or Louis Jordan or any of the people, not knowing it. That is B. B-
King.

That 1s no different than the “terms” we all use in speaking. We all use
things that our friends use, and that our parents use, that are now part of
us. Part of what we want to do in this interview is to estabalish what 1s B. B.
King’s guitar style, and where various elements of B. B. King’s guitar style
came from.

The very beginning of B. B. King was “Three O’Clock Blues.” I
was Starting to learn a little bit, I was starting to walk—crawling in
the beginning—if you were able to put it together, you would say,
“Oh yea, I know what he will sound like in ’86.”

I started teaching guitar to little kids in 1966, and these kids would
come in with a B. B. King recording, saying that is the lick they wanted to
This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on fff:ffff on Thu, 01 Jan 1976 12:34:56 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 16 ---
B. B. KING 149
learn. That, in many ways for many years, was sort of a signature lick or
identity or part of what you were. Do you remember how that came about?

When I first got my electric guitar—it was a little black Gibson
with the “F” holes in it, acoustic—I got a DeArmond pick-up for it,
and the first amplifier was a little Gibson amplifier, just about the
size of that tape recorder. I don’t remember now what it was called,
but it had this ten-inch speaker in it. I couldn’t hear low bass
sounds, like most people do. Today, my bass player can fool me
very easy; I can hear treble sounds better. So, in order for me to
play and make sense to myself, I played with a lot of treble on that
first little electric guitar.

Finally, I bought the first Fender that they made, and that really
gave me treble. So that was the beginning of this treble sound that
you hear today. With the stereo guitar I am able to mix the sounds
somewhat as I go along, so one of my little secrets has been, from
the beginning, to open up the amp and set it from the guitar as I
play.

Usually when I record they give me some leeway: I never like
straight in, I like to have the amp where I can hear it myself. I am
able to mix the sound, not to look down and see what I got it on,
but the way it sounds good to me. And that little stereo flipping
switch from one speaker to the other, I never move. It stays in the
middle; rare thing for me to move it. The other little thing, the
control knob, which seems to change the sound from bass to com-
plete treble, I never use, because to me it takes away the energy that
I need.

Another thing I like about the Gibson Guitar (ES-135) is, I can
ease my big old hands under there, touch the one that I want, and
get it just like I want very easily without making a noise. And most
times people don’t even know I’ve done it—they just hear a differ-
ence in sound.

So, that is the sound that started B. B. King to become the B. B.
King, along with a lick or two. All came from this treble sound and
certain things, [such as] not knowing one bar from the other. So,
when I start with an intro, and the rhythm section starts playing
from feeling, I might let the rhythm section get to the fifth bar
before I realize it, so 1 have to make a quick move to the IV chord. I
think that was the beginning of it. Usually now I am aware in most
cases, but I still get out in space sometimes and caught out there.
Even now I am terrible if I try to play or sing a cappella or sing
along, so I always need a guide, I always need somebody out
there—that rhythm section.

In a “Gambler’s Blues” (1966) recording I have, you did a jazz type of
pull-off.

We recorded that at the Burning Spear in Chicago.

I’m curtous: how often do you play that lick where you touch the strings

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 17 ---
150 THE BLACK PERSPECTIVE IN MUSIC

and lift your fingers off? Is that a pull-off? To me that 1s more a jazz
approach to guitar playing. I listen to both Howard Roberts and Barney
Kessel. They do it all the time. I wonder where you may have picked up that
way of playing?

I don’t know, but I guess I am somewhat like Barney Kessel
quite often. He stated that he thought that Charlie Christian was
the father of the electric guitar. Barney listened to him, so did I. I
don’t know—I’m just being honest with you—I really don’t know.

You have talked a lot in various interviews, and even earlier today,
about Django, Charlie Christian, and the other people you’ve listened to
quite a bit. If you will remember when we talked to you about Bill Jennings
and T-Bone Walker, we were asking about specific things you got from those
players. Can you talk in the same sort of specifics about the elements of their
guitar playing you tried to incorporate into yours?

During the time of Charlie Christian, most people weren’t
aware of chords like ninths and thirteenths. So, what Charlie Chris-
tian was really known for was using those progressions. He used
what we call diminished chords, and, Man, he could break them up
so pretty. He just lay ‘em out—breaking up those diminished
chords—and still had a good rhythmic pattern going along with it.
Well, that to me started the improvising. That was one way even
horn players could improvise something. So the guitar doing those
diminished chords made it stand out just a little bit different from
what some horn players had been doing.

When you're talking about his breaking down into diminished chords,
are you talking about simply running a diminished chord as a single-note
solo?

Yes. You can do that even today, and it sounds pretty. And if
you keep within the diminished structure, you’re never going to
screw up really, because if you know your instrument you can go all
over the neck and just keep going. Well, Django seemed to have
had a different conception of progressions, and his single string
was superb—it still is today.

I think one of the things that made him [different] was because
he started off studying to be a violinist, and due to an accident in
his trailer he got his hand burned, [and] started playing the guitar.
So now, when he started to play guitar, to me Django had a trill that
he would get on his guitar. Each time he would hit a note, it was just
like there was not going to be another one—so I'll take care of this
here, and milk this one as long as I can. So each time he touched
that [note] it was like touching a lady, you know; this is it! And I
would feel that certain little something [when I listened to him],
and I still do.

It is a little bit of something extra: like the note is B-flat, sure it’s
B-flat—bang, it’s B-flat. But it’s B-flat with just a little bit of a grace
note with it. That is the way I feel. So, that is the part that Charlie

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 18 ---
B. B. KING 151
Christian had, the certain little touch that Django had. I can’t de-
scribe it any further than what I have told you. There is a certain
little something [put] on each note, and to me each one of them is
important. Each note! You don’t just play it because it is a note to
be played.

You have spoken about non-guitarists being influential on you. I believe
you mentioned Lous Jordan’s alto-sax playing, and you talked about Lester
Young a few temes. Would you talk specifically about their saxophone-
playing and the sort of things you’ve tried to incorporate in your guitar-
playing?

Louis Jordan had a way of hitting at a note that he really stayed
with; for instance, if the note is in the key of C, he would stretch the
note to D-flat or C-sharp, [then] down to the C—slur it down. O.K.,
let’s assume that we were starting on the 5th, [then move from] the
G to the A, to the C, then push the D out back to the C—that is
Louis Jordan. He would do that same sort of thing. So that is the
part I would have borrowed from him. It is B. B. King. But what I
am trying to say is that is what I would hear Louis Jordan doing,
even if I don’t hear him.

What about “Prez” [Lester Young]?

The same way I described Django Reinhardt—only [“Prez”
was] just slower getting there, but very dominating in doing it, mel-
lower with it, in other words. Again, like [there] is not going to be
another note and I may be a little late getting there. But I’m com-
ing, and the waves are like Jaws [the whale] moving in the water.

Guitarists, like other instrumentalists, prefer to play in certain keys. Are
there certain keys you ltke to play in?

No. I like to think about my playing, the little bit that I can play,
all keys is good. I won’t tell anybody, because I don’t want my band
to know it, and they will—the only key that I might would be a little
short on would be E. They are going to kill me, ’cause anytime a
guy gets in my group, I find the weak key that he plays in and I'll
keep him in it. When he leaves me, he will be able to play whatever
he knows in all the keys. So my shortest-coming would be in the key
of E, but I do things quite often in E.

With regards to tuning, you use standard tuning all the time now. Have
you always done that?

All the time.

One last question: can you break down into any time-frames the evolu-
tion or development of your guitar style? Are there times you’ve made quan-
tum leaps that you can sort of mark off ?

Well, it’s kind of like every record I’ve made: I always thought
there was something special on it. I’ve never made a perfect record,
but each time that I played a record, I always felt that I played
something that I never played before—even if I didn’t like it after-
wards. I think I am quite critical of most things I do. In fact, the

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 19 ---
152 THE BLACK PERSPECTIVE IN MUSIC
Neb pe Wik |
TE.
} et ad vi
i
Me
me
3 2 ae . i
A Bs <f
(Was ok ew =
is aoe Ly
wa > r}
oe | f ° } } aa r
fe: be pee eS ‘
ey fo FN iv oi a
aad FS) ' ~
il A Oe <7 na
B. B. King and Chris Christofferson
guys that work with me—. [No one] has ever heard me playing my
own records in my room unless it was something that I was working
on. I play them, but nobody else is going to hear me do it.

I have never practiced like musicians usually do. I practice
different in that I don’t pick up the guitar a lot of times. But since
I’ve been sitting talking to you, I looked at the neck of it quite a few
times and saw things that I would like to do that I haven’t done,
that I wanted to do and haven’t been able to do. That is my way of
practicing in a lot of cases—seeing a picture of a guitar in my hand.
Good thing God put our brains where nobody sees what we are
thinking (laughing).

I did that quite a few times when I was trying to describe to you
a few minutes ago about the notes—like starting, for instance, the
B-string, starting with G to go to CG, and all that. I’m visualizing the
neck of the guitar. In fact, if I hear you play or hear a record, that’s
the way I get it into my head what is going on—I start looking at
the neck of my guitar and associate what I hear with it. That is the
only way I can get it straight. But anyway, I hope I was able to say
something that makes some sense to you.

Thank you for sharing with us your candid perception of B. B. King the
artist.

Southeast Missouri State University
This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:20:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
