--- Page 1 ---
i, ig: cee Gees se LS | fee OT ell
j Be 8 a I
: | ae or SN
¥ : Oy ee ee ve 8 Se
BY CHRIS GILL T-Bone Walker struck the stormy
world of the blues like a lightning bolt from the heavens.
Infusing the blues with a sophisticated, uptown flavor,
Walker helped redirect the course of the music, taking it
from juke joints and roadhouses to swank nightclubs and
large theaters. Favoring swing rhythms and big-band accom-
paniment, Walker blended jazz and blues and became a sem-
inal figure in the development of urban blues and early rock
and roll. § T-Bone was a flamboyant entertainer whose wild
stage antics were a sharp contrast to the more conservative
sit-down performances of most of the country blues musi-
cians who preceded him. Dancing, doing splits, and playing
the guitar behind his head, T-Bone whipped audiences into a
frenzy. Countless guitarists imitated his stage moves, includ-
ing Chuck Berry, Guitar Slim, Buddy Guy, Jimi Hendrix, and
Stevie Ray Vaughan.
17

--- Page 2 ---
18 TEXAS AND THE WEST COAST
But T-Bone’s most lasting contribution was his pioneering electric guitar style. bend the strings. Soon after. 2:
Walker was one of the first musicians to embrace the electric guitar, and his horn- he picked up dancing in the :~
inspired single-note lines helped establish the guitar as a featured solo instrument. his experience playing the bz:
His licks have become standard fixtures in the rock and blues guitarist’s vocabulary guitar. T-Bone started makin -
and have influenced a wide range of guitarists, including Albert, B.B., and Freddie and played for handouts.
King, Otis Rush, Albert Collins, Billy Gibbons, Michael Bloomfield, Duane Allman, Walker started listening =: =
and Eric Clapton. John Lee Hooker, who became close friends with T-Bone, recent- heavily influenced by pianis: ~
ly said, “He was the first man that made the electric guitar popular. Everybody was well as the playing of his gu:
trying to sound like T-Bone Walker. The guitar players, you’d hear that fancy elec- performance in Dallas by L7--
tric style. It’s very up-to-date. That sound he was doin’ then would be up-to-date At 14, Walker got his firs: <2:
right now in these late years.” up with Dr. Breeding’s Med? ---.
Breeding pitched his phony =...
BORN WITH THE BLUES T-Bone Walker was born with the blues. “Man, I didn’t start band. Falling in love with ¢ =:
playing the blues ever,” Walker remarked in Nat Shapiro and Nat Hentoff’s Hear Me entourage, T-Bone ran awav =:
Talkin’ to Ya [Dover]. “That was in me before I was born, and I’ve been playing and high school. He played baz: :
living the blues ever since. You’ve got to live the blues, and with us that’s natural.” when a sheriff in Albany, Tex:
The son of Movelia Jimerson and Rance Walker, a laborer who stacked lumber Back in Dallas, Witter pire
for a mill, Aaron Thibeaux Walker entered the world on May 28, 1910, in Linden, dances, and parties to make ~-
Texas. The family moved to Lawrenceville, where Rance found work picking cot- banjo, mandolin, violin, ar <
ton. In the evenings, Movelia lulled young T-Bone to sleep with her guitar playing appeared at the Coliseum ‘> =
and singing. “The first thing I can remember was my mother singing the blues as piece band, which featured = =
she would sit alone,” Walker said in Hear Me Talkin’ to Ya. “I used to listen to her Walker dropped out of sch: :. -
singing there at night, and I knew then that the blues was in me too.” there wasn’t time enough <:: s.
When T-Bone was two years old, his father wanted to start a farm in Conroe, purchased his first guitar, a.>:
Texas. Deciding that farm life was not for her, Movelia set off with T-Bone for the guitar wasn’t loud enough :: -:
city, moving into her sister-in-law’s Dallas home. She found work cooking and band on and off for severa. v=:
cleaning for white families, and eventually got her own place in the Oak Cliff sec- where he met Charlie Chr: <- zs
tion of town. Soon she met Marco Washington, a musician who played several band went on the road, W2.s<-
stringed instruments in Coley Jones’ String Band, a group featuring several other
Washington family members. Washington and T-Bone’s mother eventually got mar- OAK CLIFF T-BONE T-Bone's -=:-
ried and established a household where music and musicians were always welcome. passed through town. Winr::
“Mama played guitar—pretty good, too,” Walker told Helen Oakley Dance in allowed to work with Callow:
Stormy Monday—The T-Bone Walker Story [Louisiana State University Press]. “Good where he played banjo whiz -.
enough to fall in with Huddie Ledbetter more than once.” Ledbetter, who recorded “Minnie the Moocher.” W2t=-
| as Lead Belly, and Blind Lemon Jefferson frequently visited the household and par- well. “Calloway fired him t<2:.
| ticipated in many high-spirited jams with Walker's mother and stepfather. By the got bigger applause than Cz ©
: time he was eight years old, T-Bone started hanging out with Jefferson, passing the dad used to tell that story 7 --
: cup for money and leading him around the rough dives lining Central Avenue. The stint with Catorac —s
: Inspired by the music he heard at home, with Jefferson, and at Dallas’ Holiness tion of a talent scout From Cs
| Church, Walker started singing, dancing, and playing a crude guitar that he made Douglas Fernell, and the tw> >
! from a Prince Albert tobacco can, nails, and wire. When he was ten he began Walker's compositions “Trix:=. >
| singing and dancing with his stepfather’s band. On weekends the band would singing style was similar tc 12::
parade through the streets of South Dallas, young T-Bone and his cousin Casey little of the sophistication cz =.
leading the way doing flashy splits and spins. T-Bone admitted that he wasn’t Towards the end of ’29. 7-=.--
much of a musician at that time, but a few years later he was good enough to play where he often spent his tim: -
the ukulele, and he worked out his own routine with the band. met Count Biloski, who offer=:
Walker’s mother let T-Bone play her guitar occasionally, showing him how to T-Bone was the only Africar. <=
. ma | ee — So
| a ia i : i Me
w—~
——
a

--- Page 3 ---
_ ao
T-BONE WALKER | 19
bend the strings. Soon afterwards, the 12-year-old saved some of the change that
he picked up dancing in the streets and bought himself a banjo. Walker said that
his experience playing the banjo later inspired him to play single-note lines on the
guitar. T-Bone started making the rounds at downtown hotels where he danced
and played for handouts.

Walker started listening to other musicians and imitating their styles. He was
heavily influenced by pianist Leroy Carr’s records, and he copied Carr’s singing as
well as the playing of his guitarist, Scrapper Blackwell. Later, T-Bone witnessed a
performance in Dallas by Lonnie Johnson, which greatly impressed him.

At 14, Walker got his first taste of life as a traveling musician when he hooked
up with Dr. Breeding’s Medicine Show, where he helped gather crowds while
Breeding pitched his phony elixir. T-Bone’s next gig was with blues singer Ida Cox’s
band. Falling in love with a dancer named Dorothy, who was part of Cox’s
entourage, T-Bone ran away from home and dropped out of his freshman year in
high school. He played banjo and danced in the show, but the gig was cut short
when a sheriff in Albany, Texas, made him return home.

Back in Dallas, Walker played on street corners and at carnivals, social functions, i
dances, and parties to make money. By 16, he was accomplished on the guitar,
banjo, mandolin, violin, and piano. He was hired to back up Ma Rainey when she
appeared at the Coliseum in Houston for three days. Joining Lawson Brooks’ 16-
piece band, which featured many of his classmates from Booker T. High School,
Walker dropped out of school for good. “I could always -aake money and figured
there wasn’t time enough for school,” T-Bone told Dance. Around this time Walker
purchased his first guitar, although he played banjo in the band since an acoustic
guitar wasn’t loud enough to be heard over the horns. Walker played with the
band on and off for several years, playing around Texas and in Oklahoma City,
where he met Charlie Christian. Not wanting to leave his mother alone while the
band went on the road, Walker eventually returned home.

OAK CLIFF T-BONE T-Bone’s next break came in 1929, when Cab Calloway’s band
passed through town. Winning first prize in an amateur contest, Walker was
allowed to work with Calloway’s band for a week. T-Bone performed his routine
where he played banjo while doing the splits, and Calloway even let him sing
“Minnie the Moocher.” Walker went over well with the audiences—perhaps too
well. “Calloway fired him because when my father did ‘Minnie the Moocher’ he
got bigger applause than Cab,” says T-Bone’s daughter, Bernita Walker-Moss. “My
dad used to tell that story all the time.”

The stint with Calloway may have been brief, but it brought Walker to the atten-
tion of a talent scout from Columbia Records. The label paired Walker with pianist
Douglas Fernell, and the two cut a 78 attributed to Oak Cliff T-Bone that featured
Walker’s compositions “Trinity River Blues” and “Wichita Falls Blues.” Walker's
singing style was similar to Leroy Carr's, and his country blues guitar playing showed
little of the sophistication or distinctive style evident on his later recordings.

Towards the end of '29, T-Bone was working as a caddie at a Dallas country club,
where he often spent his time shooting craps and gambling with patrons. Here he
met Count Biloski, who offered Walker a job as a guitarist and dancer in his band.
T-Bone was the only African American in the band, and in Oklahoma City a few

ee

--- Page 4 ---
20 | TEXAS AND THE WEST COAST
men from the audience took objection to his “friendliness” with a female singer in Influenced by saxophe=: .- : :
the group. Walker ran off to Kansas City and lay low for a while with some friends, solos and chord pattern: =>.
but his drinking and gambling was getting the worst of him. Broke and suffering a plain, unwound G szr--2 «+z
from an ulcer that bothered him for the rest of his life, Walker returned to Texas. “The way T-Bone p.zv=. =
In 1933, Walker ran into Charlie Christian again in Oklahoma City. The two were Record Shop, recalled ‘= 2- —>
reportedly taking guitar lessons from Chuck Richardson, who helped shape both guitar to the acoustic. :° . -=
musicians’ chord vocabulary. Walker and Christian started performing together. act, Morden helped T-b: == 2-
“We'd go dance and pass the hat and make money,” Walker told Living Blues. “We Sunset Strip. Decked ou: > >...
had a little routine of dancing that we did. Charlie would play guitar while I would upscale clientele and bez:>- =
play bass, and then we’d change, and he’d play bass and I’d play guitar. And then Soon the money Was >: >
we'd go into our little dance.” Although they were playing acoustic guitars at the drove around in a new 2:2. 2
time, both later became seminal figures in the popularization of the electric guitar. find, with a preference 7:7 _::
While playing with a small band at the Gem Hotel in Fort Worth, T-Bone met social situations, but in z27-.-.
his future wife Vida Lee. “She was the love of his life,” says Bernita. “My mother really disturbed him was =. :
had seen him singing and wanted to know who he was. She asked my aunt, who couldn’t play in his baré - .
told her to stay away from him because he wasn’t any good. He saw her and fell in going to be a musician. +: _ >.
love with her immediately. He took her out, and one week later they ran off to the he read, wrote, and orcrhe:2:--
courthouse and got married.” T-Bone joined Les Hite: _
The couple moved in with Walker’s mother, and T-Bone supported the family by touring as their featured +: :2_.
working on weekends with a four-piece band and during the week as a single per- the band’s rhythm secticr >: -
former. Although he was a proficient player and singer, T-Bone usually relied on his rhythms. “All the time or --= -
dancing abilities to make money. “In the show I'd be playing and singing,” Walker with the electric guitar.” --:--
recalled in Stormy Monday, “and then have to jump up right away because someone ing room, and it got so he <: _
had called for me to dance.” exciting than when he piav=: =
Walker scraped together a living as best as he could, but it wasn’t always easy started talking.”
going. His luck changed when Vida Lee decided that she wanted to move to Los When Hite’s band reache:
Angeles. “My mother stayed in Texas until her father died,” recalls Bernita. “When with the orchestra. It was 7:5 --
he died she came to Los Angeles to be with her sister, and my father came with sang the lead vocals, but i: +2.
her. Whatever my mother wanted, that’s what she got.” accompaniment.
T-Bone found jobs playing in clubs in Watts such as Little Harlem, the Club Walker usually performed =z.
Alabam, and the Plantation. He joined Big Jim Wynn’s band for a brief period, but audiences responded more e2.--
soon T-Bone’s popularity grew and he established his own following. Walker was ladeer when he first started -—-
unlike any performer Los Angeles club-goers had experienced. Sharply dressed in sung ballads, but they were = :-
double-breasted suits, Walker cut a distinctive figure, and huge crowds came to see over into the blues field.”
the performer who held his guitar in an unorthodox manner away from his body, In ’42 Walker left L.A. to “2+-
parallel to the floor. T-Bone stunned audiences with bold stage moves that culmi- club. The lavish production #2:-
nated with him playing the guitar behind his head and dropping to the floor in sets, and fancy lighting. Waix:-
splits without missing a note. the show enjoyed a three-mc7.-
“Things were always jumping,” Henry “Phace” Roberts recounted to Dance established.
about T-Bone’s early L.A. shows. “The chicks would be excited. You’d see them Later in ’42, T-Bone finally =:
crossing the floor, climbing the bandstand, and handing Bone money. Fives and cut “I Got a Break Baby” and *
even tens! When he went into the splits, they’d kneel beside him, counting out Capitol Records. Walker’s guiz:-
their bills, putting them in his pockets or guitar.” guitar solos that last more thax.
: cated, bluesy lines are distings’s
ELECTRIFYING THE BLUES The atmosphere in these L.A. clubs was raucous and sliding adjacent-string unisons
rowdy. To be heard over the commotion, Walker got himself a Gibson ES-250 elec- “Mean Old World” became ak
tric guitar and an amplifier and started to develop his groundbreaking style. electric blues.
i
a ar
il "
ye Pe
,

--- Page 5 ---
et
T-BONE WALKER | 21
Influenced by saxophone and horn lines and phrases, T-Bone played single-note
solos and chord patterns that mimicked horn sections. He restrung his guitar with
a plain, unwound G string that allowed him to bend notes.

“The way T-Bone played was fantastic,” Marili Morden, who ran the Jazz Man
Record Shop, recalled in Stormy Monday. “I hadn't expected to prefer the electric
guitar to the acoustic. It was new to us all, and I was dumbfounded.” Moved by his
act, Morden helped T-Bone get booked at the plush Trocadero Club on Hollywood's
Sunset Strip. Decked out in tails, Walker made a first-class impression on the club’s
upscale clientele and became the talk of the town.

Soon the money was rolling in. Walker dressed in the finest East Coast suits and
drove around in a new Cadillac or Buick. He hired the best musicians he could
find, with a preference for jazz players. T-Bone was always genial and easygoing in
social situations, but in rehearsal he was painstakingly serious. “The one thing that
really disturbed him was musicians who couldn’t read music,” notes Bernita. “You
couldn’t play in his band if you could not read music. He felt that if you were
going to be a musician, you had to read. My dad had a third-grade education, but
he read, wrote, and orchestrated music for every instrument in his band.”

T-Bone joined Les Hite’s Los Angeles Cotton Club Orchestra in 1940 and started
touring as their featured vocalist. He also played guitar, but due to objections from
the band’s rhythm section, he put aside his electric and strummed acoustic
rhythms. “All the time on the road he was backstage practicing and experimenting
with the electric guitar,” notes Vida Lee in Stormy Monday. “He had it in the dress-
ing room, and it got so he could do just about what he liked with it. It was more
exciting than when he played acoustic, and the sound was so new that people
started talking.”

When Hite’s band reached New York circa June 1940, Walker cut “T-Bone Blues”
with the orchestra. It was his first recording since his 1929 Columbia 78. Walker
sang the lead vocals, but it was Frank Pasley who played the electric steel guitar
accompaniment.

Walker usually performed ballads with Hite’s band, but he soon found that his
audiences responded more enthusiastically to the blues. “My dad was really a bal-
ladeer when he first started out,” recalls Bernita. “He wasn’t a blues person. He
sung ballads, but they were not received as great as his blues. So then he rolled
over into the blues field.”

In 42 Walker left L.A. to take a headlining stint at Chicago’s Rhumboogie night-
club. The lavish production featured choreographed dancing, elaborately designed
sets, and fancy lighting. Walker's performances attracted capacity audiences, and
the show enjoyed a three-month run. By now T-Bone’s status as a front person was
established.

Later in ’42, T-Bone finally had the chance to record his electric guitar when he
cut “I Got a Break Baby” and “Mean Old World” with Freddie Slack’s band for
Capitol Records. Walker's guitar playing dominates both songs, which begin with
guitar solos that last more than a minute before T-Bone’s vocal begins. His sophisti-

cated, bluesy lines are distinguished by a loose, swinging sense of timing, slick,
sliding adjacent-string unisons, jazzy chords, and bent diminished chord triads.
“Mean Old World” became a hit, introducing many musicians to a new sound—
electric blues.
Fr aa

--- Page 6 ---
22 | TEXAS AND THE WEST COAST
Walker recorded a few other sides with Slack’s band, but these songs were not nobody else can get i: ee
released due to a recording ban that lasted for most of World War II. During this music or the food in :_: - ~z
period, Walker worked with Marl Young’s orchestra in Chicago. He recorded several By the mid '50s Wa!::- ~
outstanding compositions in ’45 for the Rhumboogie label; these were the first artists such as Chuck =2—- xs
records to feature Walker’s name on the label. They didn’t sell particularly well, but Bartholomew’s R&B cut-* 7
they were highly influential, especially the jump blues “T-Bone Boogie,” which fea- songs like “Teen Age =:- w
tures a I-IV-V progression, upbeat rhythm, and stunning guitar solo that may have feel. However, these #22: - |
been the template for Chuck Berry’s rock and roll music nearly a decade later. manded. “Things hacr. : --.2-
Some of Berry’s “signature” licks are note-for-note duplications of Walker’s solo. guys like Muddy Watez: :-: .
“When they inducted my dad into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in ’87, Chuck ing fast. But for me the :.-:
Berry was there also,” Bernita reminisces. “After they presented me with my dad’s Bothered by his ulce: :-: >
trophy, he came over to me and said, ‘Baby, I want you to know something. Your band. He still played s-:- ir
dad is the greatest musician that ever lived. All the things that people see me do by himself or with his -=7- =.
on the stage, I got that from your daddy.’” To keep costs down, W2.: =>
In ’46 and '47, Walker recorded dozens of sides for the Black & White label. When Walker was in Lz: -> 2
Most of these songs were blues numbers, but he also cut a few romantic ballads the site of many star-st:2-=- |
such as “I’m Waiting for Your Call,” “I Want a Little Girl,” and “I’m Still in Love Bernita remembers. ONG tes
with You.” His biggest hit, “Call It Stormy Monday,” was issued in late ’47, and it into—drums, organ, pigni: oo
made T-Bone Walker a household name from coast to coast. Unfortunately, Walker people came in—Ray Cn::.=
was robbed of thousands of dollars in royalties due to the existence of a similarly Crayton, Jim Wynn, Guizi- |
titled song that was recorded after T-Bone’s version, but released earlier. Leo Blevins, Percy Mayiie. :—z
“Call It Stormy Monday” influenced many aspiring blues guitarists. “He was the Mama Thornton was ali.) =
first electric guitar player I heard on record,” B.B. King told Guitar Player. “T-Bone the Little Rascals came <-2: +
Walker had a touch that nobody has been able to duplicate. He made me so that I T-Bone was still making t+. °
Knew I just had to go out and get an electric guitar.” ’59 coming out on the 1z:--:
Walker was at the peak of his career. He hit the road on all-star “Battle of the album featured remakes 2: -.
Blues” tours, sharing star billing with artists such as Ray Charles, Lowell Fulson, “Stormy Monday,” and \2.s =
Wynonie Harris, Big Joe Turner, and Jimmy Witherspoon. Because T-Bone’s ener- cuts. Although mostly igr.:--:
getic performance was such a hard act to follow, he inevitably closed the shows. He jazz enthusiasts.
hooked up with booking agent Harold Oxley, who helped bring bigger, more lucra- T-Bone got a chance at = 7: —
tive gigs. Backed by Jim Wynn’s band, T-Bone toured extensively from the late ’40s package show featuring Ge: 72:
until ’5S. Walker didn’t do any recording during ’48 and ’49, but many of his Black but he left halfway throug=. «- -
& White sides were issued by Capitol Records during this time. his standards. Basie went t: = _-
Walker signed with Imperial Records in 1950 and cut more than 50 songs for the Walker had a second chen:-
label over the next four years. Although he never scored another hit as popular as tour package that also fea---=-
“Call It Stormy Monday,” his Imperial recordings helped him maintain his career Sonny Terry, and Brownie *." :
throughout the early ’5Os. Riding high on his success, T-Bone bought himself a listen. You've got to be a sin-: —
fancy new blond Gibson ES-5, which became his main guitar. splits the fans booed! Thev 2:7
on Original American Folk B.:.:.
THAT MEAN OLD WORLD Although dozens of artists started imitating T-Bone’s music Atlantic.
and showmanship, he seemed unfazed by the competition. Walker was always Waiker returned to Eurorz _-
generous with his music, and he shared his playing secrets with anyone who together and to perform fou: :-
asked. “If you came to him,” recounts Bernita, “and you were a musician and said, music over there,” Bernita c:—--
. ‘Bone, I sure liked that chord you hit,’ he would say, ‘Come here. Let me show over there as much as he dic --
you how to do it.’ That’s what Johnny Guitar Watson, Pee Wee Crayton, Wes away from us. That annoyed =_-
Montgomery, and Eric Clapton did. My dad was always encouraging and support- alternative but to go over the::
ive. It wasn’t a big deal to him. Some people want to hide their particular style so During the mid ’60s Walxe: >
ai:
ee _
- i a,
a .
a

--- Page 7 ---
ow
T-BONE WALKER | 23
nobody else can get it. My dad was very giving about everything, whether it was
music or the food in our house.”

By the mid ’50s Walker's big band style started to fall out of fashion as newer
artists such as Chuck Berry and Elvis Presley gained popularity. Working with Dave
Bartholomew’s R&B outfit and members of Fats Domino’s band, Walker recorded
songs like “Teen Age Baby,” where prominent drums gave the music a rock and roll
feel. However, these failed to win Walker the attention that the newer artists com-
manded. “Things hadn’t exactly slowed at that time,” Walker told Dance, “because
guys like Muddy Waters and John Lee Hooker were doing okay, and B.B. was climb-
ing fast. But for me the situation wasn’t so hot.”

Bothered by his ulcer and other health problems, Walker decided to break up his
band. He still played shows around Los Angeles, and occasionally he hit the road
by himself or with his nephew R.S. Rankin, a guitarist who was billed as T-Bone Jr.
To keep costs down, Walker worked with local pickup bands in the cities he visited.
When Walker was in Los Angeles, his friends often dropped by, and his home was
the site of many star-studded jam sessions. “We had jam sessions on Sundays,”
Bernita remembers. “My dad played any instrument that you didn’t have to blow
into—drums, organ, piano, xylophone, bass, cello, violin, banjo. Lots of different
people came in—Ray Charles, Johnny Guitar Watson, the Four Tops, Pee Wee
Crayton, Jim Wynn, Guitar Slim, Jimmy Witherspoon, Louis Jordan, Roy Gaines,
Leo Blevins, Percy Mayfield—all these individuals who were in the blues field. Big
Mama Thornton was always over. They were real good friends. Even Stymie from
the Little Rascals came over. He lived with us for a while.”

T-Bone was still making records, with music from three sessions in ’55, ‘56, and
‘59 coming out on the Atlantic LP T-Bone Blues in ’60. This critically acclaimed
album featured remakes of his early hits “Mean Old World,” “T-Bone Shuffle,” and
“Stormy Monday,” and Walker was joined by Rankin and Barney Kessel on three
cuts. Although mostly ignored by blues fans, the album helped introduce Walker to
jazz enthusiasts.

T-Bone got a chance at a comeback in 1960 when Count Basie asked him to join a
package show featuring George Shearing and Ruth Brown. T-Bone accepted the offer,
but he left halfway through the tour because he felt that his act wasn’t living up to
his standards. Basie went to Europe the following year and was a huge success.

Walker had a second chance in ’62 when he ventured over to Europe as part of a
tour package that also featured Willie Dixon, John Lee Hooker, Memphis Slim,
Sonny Terry, and Brownie McGhee. “We had a ball,” Walker recalled. “People there
listen. You've got to be a showman back here. Over there, the first time I did the
splits the fans booed! They came to hear the music.” One performance was released
on Original American Folk Blues Festival, which was successful on both sides of the
Atlantic.

Walker returned to Europe in ’65 to play with a group that John Mayall had put
together and to perform four shows in France. “There was an audience for his
music over there,” Bernita comments. “He didn’t like the fact that he had to stay
over there as much as he did in order for us to eat over here. He didn’t like to be
away from us. That annoyed him, but he couldn’t get any work here. He had no
alternative but to go over there where he was received more.”

During the mid ’60s Walker started recording again, participating in sessions in

--- Page 8 ---
24 | TEXAS AND THE WEST COAST
Chicago and Houston. In ’66 he recorded a Jazz at the Philharmonic Series album
featuring Duke Ellington and members of his band, as well as Oscar Peterson. ¢
Interest in Walker’s music picked up again stateside, and he signed with ABC
Paramount Records. Producer Bob Thiele attempted to update T-Bone’s sound on
the album Stormy Monday Blues, but the result was a misguided effort that didn’t
complement Walker's style. Thiele made several other ill-fated attempts to present
T-Bone in a contemporary setting, as heard on Funky Town, Super Black Blues, and
Every Day I Have the Blues. :
Walker continued to tour Europe and the U.S., including an appearance at the
1967 Monterey Jazz Festival. While on tour in France in ’68, T-Bone’s treasured
ES-5 was stolen. “He was totally devastated,” Bernita remembers. “It was a special
Gibson—a big guitar, not like these little things that they play now. He was thor-
oughly sick when that was taken. That was his pride and joy.” Walker replaced the
guitar with a Barney Kessel Regular archtop electric. ™ ones
The National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences awarded T-Bone a Best ® al
Ethnic/Traditional Recording Grammy in 1970 for his album Good Feelin’. In 71, a me ;
the Allman Brothers Band included a cover of “Call It Stormy Monday” on their ss ’ \
best-selling Live at the Fillmore East album, introducing T-Bone’s music to a new . ;
generation of fans. T-Bone should have received a handsome royalty payment, but Py | * oa
instead the money went to his label at the time. Be v ul ‘
“He got shafted by a number of agents and publishers,” Bernita laments. “My "> Via ee"
dad was the type of person who took you at your word. He trusted you. If you said | al v * ta
that was what was in the contract, then to him that was what was in the contract ; 1
and he signed his name. He signed away a lot of things where he didn’t realize he i ss
was doing. After he found out that that’s what he did, he was very upset about it.” AE ;
Through all the troubles, T-Bone never lost his passion for playing. “He played ee. ee me @ van \ |
around the house all the time,” Bernita recalls. “He practiced a lot without his ‘Se, yy . é
amp, playing chords and doing his finger movements. During the latter years he G28 2 &
suffered from arthritis, so he did that a lot for therapy.” —— =e
T-Bone’s management put him out on the road again, backed by a rock band
featuring guitarist Paul Pena. Walker disliked the band’s loud playing and inflexi-
bility, but he endured the tours because they made him money. Walker still BY JAS OBR:i cz
payetl well, but his cueing on the road begat to take a, kal on ad health. In war # King of tire Be
June ’74 Walker played his last concert, appearing on a bill headlined by John Lee
Hooker in Pittsburgh. ing his first Saunders: +-
On New Year’s Eve, Walker suffered a stroke. He was admitted a the West Vernon at the mention of =": -.
Convalescent Home, where he passed away on March 16, 1975. His funeral was
held a few days later at the Angelus Funeral Home. T-Bone’s friends, fans, and fami- of his! He was one <7 ~
ly pushed to the front of a standing Soont-Only crowd that apie out onto the side- blues and had the +=: ~
walks. The sendoff was a fitting finale to T-Bone’s long and illustrious career.
was a great singer, --. 7s
ized. I especially lixs: °
| one and a part twce <=: >
Infirmary’ on Aladé:r |
greatest ever.” 9 Bi-
ual . *
- e
me: ia “i
ie mee “i :
=
