--- Page 1 ---
© UNIVERSITY OF eth nomusicology
Afro-American Gospel Music: A Crystallization of the Black Aesthetic
Author(s): Pearl Williams-Jones
Source: Ethnomusicology , Sep., 1975, Vol. 19, No. 3 (Sep., 1975), pp. 373-385
Published by: University of Illinois Press on behalf of Society for Ethnomusicology
Stable URL: |https://www.jstor.org/stable/850791
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
penne of content in a trusted aieliel archive. We use information ieclpology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
University of Illinois Press and Society for Ethnomusicology are collaborating with JSTOR to
eC OI digitize, preserve and extend access to Ethnomusicology
ee
wes
This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:41:49 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 2 ---
AFRO-AMERICAN GOSPEL MUSIC:
A CRYSTALLIZATION OF THE BLACK AESTHETIC
Pearl Williams-Jones
INTRODUCTION

I. a basic theoretical concept of a black aesthetic can be drawn from the

history of the black experience in America, the crystallization of this
concept is embodied in Afro-American gospel music. The cultural traditions
and ideals of West Africa are the ultimate source from which the basic
concept of a black aesthetic definition is derived. There are many aspects of
black American culture, such as folktales, speech patterns, religious beliefs and
musical practices, which reveal connecting links to African roots in subtle and
sometimes obvious ways. Black gospel music, however, retains the most
noticeable African-derived aesthetic features of all (Washington 1973:19-35,
78-79). In concept and practice there has been some, but little significant
deviation in gospel from many of the basic traits found in the traditional
music of West Africa and the various phases of evolvement in the Afro-
American cultural continuum. Deviation from or conformity to ancestral
traditional practices is influenced by environmental factors. According to John
Szwed, “Song forms and performances are themselves models of social
behavior that reflect strategies of adaptation to human and natural environ-
ments.” Black gospel music, then, reflects changes and retentions of West
African musical style and context that can only be “understood within a
synthesis of social and cultural change” (Szwed 1970:220).

The consistent and persistent retention in gospel music performance and
practice of a clearly defined black identity growing out of the black
experience in America is indicative of the indomitability of the African ethos.
The process of acculturation and syncretism has done much to alter the social
fabric of black life in America. In spite of this fact, cultural ties of the
ancestral lineage have been preserved in various forms within the enclave of
the black gospel church and its music—black gospel. Black gospel music is one
of the new seminal genres of contemporary black culture which continually
maintains its self-identity while it nourishes and enrichens the mainstream of
the world’s cultural sources.

373
This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:41:49 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 3 ---
374 ETHNOMUSICOLOGY, SEPTEMBER 1975

THE FOUNDATION FOR A BLACK AESTHETIC DEFINITION

The concept of a black aesthetic definition has been increasingly
debated in recent years among black intellectuals. Poets, writers, critics, and
philosophers appear aware of the importance and desirability of formulating a
comprehensive statement concerning the essential elements of the black
aesthetic in black arts.

One essential purpose of the definition is the establishment in American
cultural thought of the existence and profound significance of distinct and
unique African-American art forms. The proper assessment of the black art
forms, gospel music included, must emerge from aesthetic criteria which have
been evolved through black thought and tradition. It must be realized,
according to McPherson, et al. that,

... White aesthetic terminology, for all its avowed lack of social involve-

ment, is rooted in racism of white society and therefore inappropriate for

judging black expression (1971:264).

Stephen Henderson continues,

... the recognition of Blackness in poetry is a value judgment which on

certain levels and in certain instances, notably in matters of meaning that go

beyond questions of structure and theme, must rest upon one’s immersion

in the totality of the Black experience (1973:65).

In order to establish a black aesthetic definition as applied to black art forms,
the implications of the black gospel church and the music associated with it
should be brought into focus.

THE BLACK GOSPEL CHURCH

If it is true, as it has been commonly claimed, that the church is a
conservative institution, then we can assume that it is likely that many of
those cultural characteristics which are typical of blacks would be preserved in
their truest form in the black church and hence, in black religious music. This
assumption appears valid if consideration is given to the ethnic-styled mode of
worship and the style and function of music in this setting. Many of the black
churches in urban as well as rural communities maintain worship services
which are essentially unchanged from those of the slave’s praise houses and
and the early black churches of the freed men. There are several accounts of
these which have been historically documented. Readings in Black American
Music (Southern, ed. 1971:62, 68, 70, 112, 113, 146, 147) give an indication
of the close relationship of early black church worship with some contempo-
rary carry-over. Hale Smith, eminent black composer and an articulate
spokesman on black music has stated:

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:41:49 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 4 ---
WILLIAMS-JONES: AFRO-AMERICAN GOSPEL MUSIC 375

On the North American continent the Black musical definition is most clear

in that music of the Black man who is closest to the soil or in the lower

cultural or economic levels... you will find blues singers out of Mississippi

or singers in the various store-front churches which come as close as

anything can to the essence of the black experience through music (de

Lerma 1970:69).

The singers “in the various store-front churches” referred to by Smith are
performers of gospel, as well as other forms of black religious music.

Many of the practices which we commonly associate with the gospel
church, such as dance, the emotional and musical delivery style of sermons,
and the spontaneous verbal and non-verbal responses by preachers and
congregations, have been appropriated and often emasculated by secular
performers who seek to recreate what is essentially a genuine spiritual element
in an authentic gospel performance. Ben Sidran states:

Both the association of music with magic in African cultures and the

importance of music to the development of black Christianity in America

have been cited as proof of connection between black music and black

spirituality (1971:xvii).

While this spirituality may be one of the most emotionally potent forces in
the arsenal of the black aesthetic, it has not necessarily remained the exclusive
property of the black church. In the “world” it is known colloquially as
“soul.”

Significantly, black religious music more than secular music was one of
the most potent moral weapons in the human rights struggle of the 1960s. A
whole generation of young blacks were introduced to the power of gospel
songs and spirituals to “... galvanize a group of individuals on an emotional,
non-verbal level of experience” (Sidran 1971:xiv), which provided a bond of
cohesiveness and strength to the movement. At the same time, generations of
older blacks were reminded of the similar role which the spirituals had played
in the course of black history from the period of slavery.

Because black gospel music is inadequately recorded and has had limited
access to radio, television and the publication media (source and books), some
blacks and many white Americans are totally unaware of the existence of this
music. The black spirituals of slavery were similarly unknown outside of the
southern slave community until the Fisk Jubilee Singers introduced the songs
during their tours of the 1870s. Among musicologists and ethnologists there is
a beginning awareness of black gospel music, and as a result, increasing
numbers of articles and scholarly studies on the subject have begun to appear.
Much of the difficulty in developing a body of materials about gospel music is
the paucity of researched primary data on an idiom which exists principally
and most authentically in an oral tradition. Since gospel music is transmitted
primarily through oral tradition it is necessary to define this genre in the context
of the black gospel church.

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:41:49 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 5 ---
376 ETHNOMUSICOLOGY, SEPTEMBER 1975
BLACK GOSPEL MUSIC

Black gospel music, a synthesis of West African and Afro-American
music, dance, poetry and drama, is a body of urban contemporary black
religious music of rural folk origins which is a celebration of the Christian
experience of salvation and hope. It is at the same time a declaration of black
selfhood which is expressed through the very personal medium of music.
Having been for most of its fifty years of existence an underground or
counterculture body of music, gospel is among the least known or understood
of the many black cultural expressions today.

While the influences of Western religious concepts and music upon black
religious music are indisputable and have been factually documented through
musicological and historical analysis, the overriding dominance of the African-
ization of these Western influences is equally indisputable (Washington, 1973).
“The very importance of song in black worship is an Africanism hard to
overestimate” (Roberts:1972:174). Without negation of the presence of
European-derived harmonies, forms, and instances of actual usage of white
hymn tunes in gospel music, the principle emphasis is upon the utilization of
these elements in an unusual way to create new forms. Unlike the art song
arrangements of black spirituals, or the movement in “third stream’ jazz
techniques, which actively and deliberately incorporated European classical
musical concepts and practices, black gospel music has not consciously sought
the assimilation of European religious music practices or materials into its
genre. If this has occurred, the materials have been improvisationally re-
created to conform to black aesthetic requirements of performance. Donald
Byrd, jazz artist, lecturer and music educator was quoted in the Washington
Post as having stated:

Gospel music is one of the few black art forms that hasn’t evolved into

something else. There hasn’t been any evolution in it like there has been in

jazz, or folk, with the changing of the beat, the basic construction, and even

harmonic techniques. It’s one of the pure strains in the black heritage that

hasn’t changed from its birth in Africa, except for the first adaptation to

the white man’s church (Smith 1969: magazine section).

Gospel has distilled the aesthetic essence of the black arts into a unified
whole. It is a colorful kaleidoscope of black oratory, poetry, drama and
dance. One has only to experience a gospel “happening” in its cultural setting
to hear black poetry in the colorful oratory of the black gospel preacher, or
to see the drama of an emotion-packed performance of a black gospel choir
interacting with its gospel audience, and the resulting shout of the holy dance.
It is indeed a culmination of the black aesthetic experience.

As a relatively new manifestation of a long historical tradition of
religious music, black gospel music has drawn upon such source music as
Spirituals, ring shouts, jubilees, chants, and camp meeting songs which

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:41:49 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 6 ---
WILLIAMS-JONES: AFRO-AMERICAN GOSPEL MUSIC 377
themselves had numerous retentions of Africanisms. Bruno Nettl (1965:180)
takes the position that African features are retained and in evidence in the
music most closely associated with religion or ritual. He and other scholars
(Bastide 1971) maintain that while music of the U.S. blacks exhibits the least
Africanisms of those areas in the Americas and the islands where there were
African slaves,

U.S. Negroes retained much of the structure of the African heritage, and

while their folk music does not sound African in the sense that the music of

Haiti and Bahia does, it contains some African stylistic features (Nettl

1965:180).

Nettl’s basic concept is one which adheres to the philosophy that, “only in
the style of performance can we detect definitely African roots” (1965: 180).
Evidence of this concept is recognized in a comparative analysis of the
stylistic performances of two well-known gospel singers: James Cleveland,
Afro-American gospel singer and George Beverly Shea, Anglo-American gospel
singer.

The vocal timbre, phrasing, rhythmic emphasis, and dramatic projection
of the text in such a time-honored white gospel hymn as, “Peace Be Still”
reflects the contrasting conceptual aesthetic form which each performance
emanates. James Standifer (1972:100) notes that “the black performer makes
a rendition strikingly ‘black’ by bringing himself and the black experience to
that rendition.” In “‘quasi-sermon” fashion, Cleveland utilizes the vast arsenal
of vocal devices which are at his disposal through cultural tradition: moans,
grunts, wails, shouts, gliding pitches, and song speech. Shea, on the other
hand, has a style of delivery which stresses clear enunciation of words, clean,
clear phrasing, and incorporates few glides or slides to and from pitches. In
general, his delivery is a typical “straight” or literal representation of the song
text and music. Stylistic comparisons of performance practices can also
“... reveal much about the acculturation and assimilation process constantly
working in reciprocity with blacks and whites in America” (Standifer
1972:100). The African and Afro-American concept of the “beautiful’’ singing
voice does not entirely concur with Western concepts. Harold Courlander has
noted,

In most traditional singing there is no apparent striving for the “smooth”

and “sweet” qualities that are so highly regarded in Western tradition. Some

outstanding blues, gospel, and jazz singers have voices that may be described

as foggy, hoarse, rough, or sandy. Not only is this kind of voice not

derogated, it often seems to be valued. Sermons preached in this type of

voice appear to create a special emotional tension. Examination of African

singing tradition indicates that there, too, “sweetness” of voice is not a

primary objective, and that other considerations are regarded as more

relevant to good singing (1963:23).

Some facets of West African musical practice are seemingly more
dominant in the gospel idiom than in the primary black religious forms such
This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:41:49 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 7 ---
378 ETHNOMUSICOLOGY, SEPTEMBER 1975

as the spirituals. The role and significance of accompaniment in gospel music
is a case in point. Traditional spirituals were unaccompanied and limited in
thythmic accompaniment to swaying, footpatting, and handclapping. Instru-
ments were generally unavailable or forbidden. This tradition of non-instru-
mental accompaniment (whether by choice, custom or circumstance singularly
or combined) of the spirituals was continued long after slavery and well into
the period during which blacks established their own churches. John W. Work
stated that:

The folk church has forbidden instruments to be used in the service in the

past apparently because the instruments available in the community, the

piano, the guitar, harmonica, and the banjo were too closely identified with

secular life or ‘“‘the world,” as opposed to the sacred church (1949: 137).
Instrumental as well as rhythmic accompaniment in gospel is an integral part
of the performance just as in African music.

What are some of the specific aesthetic requirements of black music
which have necessitated the retention of certain Africanisms in the black
religious musical continuum? The following list of distinctly African related
traits are present to a large extent in Afro-American gospel performances,
techniques, and form:

1. The use of antiphonal response.

2. Varying vocal tone.

3. Endless variation on the part of the lead singer.
4. Use of falsetto.

5. Religious dancing or “shouting.”

6. Percussive-style playing techniques.

7. Handclapping and footpatting.

8. Emphasis on dynamic rhythms.

9. A dramatic concept of the music.

10. Repetition.

11. Improvisation.

12. Communal participation.

13. Immediacy of communication.

14. Oral transmission of the idiom.

15. Functionalism of the music.

It might appear that the retention of so many Africanisms would make gospel
music more African than Afro-American. However, it is in the process of
syncretism or synthesis that aspects of some or all of the clearly discernible
Africanisms have become assimilated into the Afro-American style. An ex-
ample in point is the alteration of the rhythmic element in Afro-American
music.

The relationship of the rhythmic element in African and Afro-American
music is somewhat obvious; however, the special quality. known as “swing” in
This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:41:49 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 8 ---
WILLIAMS-JONES: AFRO-AMERICAN GOSPEL MUSIC 379
black music in general as well as gospel, is peculiarly an adaptation of the
African rhythmic fundamental. “Swing” is a term that has never been
satisfactorily defined, but it is a tangible quality in rhythmic emphasis which
distinguishes the complex metronomic polyrhythms of African drumming
from the swinging rhythms of black American music. In his book, Where’s
the Melody?, Martin Williams says of “swing”:

It is a quality empirically present or not present in a performance, and the

particular rhythmic momentum of “swing” can be felt and heard (1961:10).

In black gospel, the special use of rhythms which are distinctly gospel, and
which swing, were derived out of the holiness shout music of the early 1900s
revival movements. Courlander in commenting upon the rhythms of the black
church noted that:

It is commonplace that Negro church music and secular music not only

“swing” but also have much more sophisticated elements of off-beats,

retarded beats, and anticipated beats than does Euro-American folk music in

general.... As remote as U.S. Negro rhythm is from the African today, it is
certainly closer to it in rhythmic concepts than to either English or French

folk tradition (1963: 29).

Euro-American traits in Afro-American gospel music are evidenced primari-
ly in form, employment of certain characteristic scales, European harmony, and
the surge singing technique which had origins in the New England psalmody prac-
tice of “‘lining-out.” The concept of individual authorship of a composer is also
primarily European, and the creation of gospel songs by individual composers
was begun by Thomas A. Dorsey and continued by an early generation of
gospel composers who followed his example, notably: Lillian Bowles, Lucie
Campbell, Theodore Frye, Roberta Martin, Kenneth Morris and others. The
form which these early writers used most often was the traditional protestant
hymn type of verse and chorus. Some of the well-known examples are:
“Precious Lord, Take My Hand” by Dorsey, “Just to Behold His Face” by
Lucie Campbell, ‘‘Just a Closer Walk With Thee’? by Kenneth Morris. Form,
however, was merely the framework around which improvisation could take
place. Gospel songs are composed songs but within the clearly discernible
gospel performance tradition which is often more reflective of general folk
stylistic traits than distinct compositional techniques of the individual com-
poser. In this regard, gospel music may be considered ‘“‘composed folk song”
which is transmitted primarily through oral performance traditions in much
the same fashion as folklore. The musical score of any gospel song gives faint
clue to the vocal or instrumental improvisation which is assumed by the
composer. There existed a similar tradition of improvisation in European
music in the seventeenth century when the figured bass and the da capo aria
styles were in vogue.

Gospel music utilizes the diatonic and pentatonic scales for the most part
which, according to Chase, is not incompatible with some African tonal systems.
“The diatonic scale is common to both systems and forms, indeed, the

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:41:49 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 9 ---
380 ETHNOMUSICOLOGY, SEPTEMBER 1975

strongest link between them as well as the mark that distinguishes them from
all other systems” (1955:75). The rock/blues musician, Al Wilson, has sug-
gested, according to Roberts that

... both the blues and soul music use basically five-note scales, but different

ones...C, D, E, G, A, C, to gospel music and soul, and C, E-flat, G, A,

B-flat, C, to the blues.... If Wilson were right, it would certainly help to

explain why the blues element in much soul music, though there, is far less

obvious than gospel music (1972: 190).

Harmony in gospel music is based upon the European tradition coupled with
blues tonality which results from the use of certain blue notes with primary
and secondary chord changes. This combination, as we have seen in other
forms of black music, gives the music its distinct harmonic sound.

There is strong evidence to support the belief that black gospel singing
style has been influenced by the practices of “lining out’ which occurred in
New England psalm singing during the seventeenth century. It is a practice
which was carried on in early black churches and is still practiced in a large
number of Baptist and Methodist churches today. Chase states that this
practice

... opened the door of the introduction of the florid style... Negro singing

in America developed as the result of the blending of several cultural

traditions is certain; and it seems equally certain that one of these traditions

was the folk style of early New England psalmody and hymnody, carried

southward in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries (Chase

1955:239),

This performance style when combined with the special vocal timbres and
sonorities of the black sound aesthetic produces the unique black gospel singing
style which has been so widely copied or carried over by the black soul singers,
many of whom were former gospel singers. This leads us into a discussion of the
art of gospel singing and performance practices.

Gospel singing style is in a large measure the essence of gospel. It is a
performers art and a method of delivering lyrics which is as demanding in
vocal skills and technique as any feat in Western performance practice.
Learning or acquiring the art takes time, practice, and dedication. The
performing process is so intuitive as to be almost unteachable. The greatest
gospel artists are usually those who were born nearest the source of the
tradition. There are high aesthetic standards which are evident in the
performances of many of the best known gospel singers, but these standards
can also be observed in many obscure and unknown gospel churches through-
out the U.S. where gospel talent often flourishes in abundance unrecognized
by all except the knowledgeable few. Emerging from some such beginnings to
achieve honor and recognition among their peers and the gospel cognoscenti
has been the late Mahalia Jackson, the late Clara Ward, James Cleveland, Alex
Bradford and others. In addition there are the innumerable known and

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:41:49 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 10 ---
WILLIAMS-JONES: AFRO-AMERICAN GOSPEL MUSIC 381
unknown choirs, congregations, quartets, and groups which proliferate
throughout the country. What is the model for achieving the gospel singing
ideal?

There are two basic sources from which gospel singing has derived its
aesthetic ideals: the free-style collective improvisations of the black church
congregation and the rhetorical solo style of the black gospel preacher. In
seeking to communicate the gospel message, there is little difference between
the gospel singer and the gospel preacher in the approach to his subject. The
same techniques are used by the preacher and the singer—the singer perhaps
being considered the lyrical extension of the rhythmically rhetorical style of
the preacher. Inherent in this also is the concept of black rhetoric, folk
expressions, bodily movement, charismatic energy, cadence, tonal range and
timbre. Aretha Franklin, a consummate vocal artist in the gospel tradition, has
credited her father, a noted black gospel preacher, with having had the
greatest influence on her in his singing style and fusion of rhythm with words
and preaching. She said: “I learned vocally from him. He gave me a sense of
timing in music” (Garland 1969:198). The gospel preacher does not act alone.
The total gospel experience is one in which congregation and preacher interact
in an African related call and response pattern. For example,

(Call) What’s the matter with Jesus?

(Response) He’s alright!

(Call) I say, what’s the matter with Jesus?

(Response) He’s alright!

(Call) He’s bread when I’m hungry,

(Response) He’s alright!

(Call) Water when I’m thirsty!

(Response) He’s alright!

This typical up-tempo gospel shout song leads inevitably into a series of
chants and the holy dance.

Chant I. ‘Well, Well, Well”

Chant II. “Ho-ly Gho- -st”

This gospel experience is almost ritualistic in its sustained drama and spiritual in-
tensity. People are possessed and overcome in this state of high religious ecstasy.

These dual influences reflect the general aesthetic preference for an
intensity which use of the chest voice or open tones can produce. It enables
gospel singers to create innumerable variations of vocal color from the strident
quality of traditional hollers and laments to tonal utterances and nuances in
vocal contour which may be meaningful only to those who are sensitive
enough to cultural practices to understand such subtleties. Singing styles are

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:41:49 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 11 ---
382 ETHNOMUSICOLOGY, SEPTEMBER 1975

highly prized for the individuality which the gospel singer can bring to the
music. Originality is greatly esteemed. Some of the important gospel stylists,
such as Shirley Ceasar, and James Cleveland, are noted for the quasi-preaching
approach to a gospel song. There is the country gospel flavor of the Staple
Singers; the rock-gospel of Andrae Crouch and Edwin Hawkins; the surge
singers such as Robert Anderson and J. Robert Bradley. There are the
balladeers such as the Reverend Charles Watkins and Archie Dennis; and the
holiness shouters such as Isaac Douglass, Myrna Summers, Madame Ernestine
Washington, Mattie Moss Clark and the many quartet leaders. The soloist in
the gospel idiom has been as important in the historical development of the
gospel music style as the solo blues artist in the development of blues concept
and form. In both the blues and gospel, the projection of the individuality of
the performer, his feelings, beliefs, and desires become known. The solo
medium is very personal. LeRoi Jones thoroughly explores the socio-cultural
implications of solo forms through his analysis of blues and blues structure.
He said:

The whole concept of the solo, of a man singing and playing by himself,

was relatively unknown in West African music (Jones 1963:66).

The solo concept is more an acculturated pattern which the black artist
adapted to his own needs. As stated earlier, the gospel singer may be
considered the lyrical extension of the gospel preacher. In the early days
individual street singers carried on a gospel singing tradition that originated in
rural churches. The soloist was usually the preacher himself or one whose
voice was exceptionally suited to song leading and skillful improvisation. The
gospel soloist is virtually a stylized representation of the preacher or congre-
gational song leader.

An essential element in gospel singing technique is a breathiness in tone
production which adds a certain emotional intensity to the performance.
Breathing between words and short phrases is not considered improper to the
idiom. The audible breath intake and expulsion of air acts as a rhythmic
factor and is an essential part of black timing and rhythmic pacing. This is
heard to particular advantage in black gospel sermons and has a seeming direct
connection to the practice of rhythmic timing in work songs. It is a distinctive
ethnic phenomenon firmly rooted in tradition. The melismatic embellishments
of gospel singing can achieve dizzying heights of virtuosity among the most
skilled gospel singers. Two of the most noted exponents of this style are
Marion Williams, former lead singer with the all female Clara Ward Singers,
and Dolores Barrett Campbell, formerly of the Roberta Martin Singers. Each
of these artists has a vocal instrument of beauty (by conventional Western
criteria) with exceptional range and considerable vocal agility comparable to
the coloratura. And like the coloraturas, Miss Williams and Miss Barrett

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:41:49 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 12 ---
WILLIAMS-JONES: AFRO-AMERICAN GOSPEL MUSIC 383
incorporate a barrage of pyrotechnics into a gospel song which lifts the
simplest one to aria status in mere moments.

Black speech is a significant aspect of the gospel performance idiom, and
as such it is often equated with black poetry. In the introduction to
Understanding the New Black Poetry by Stephen Henderson, the author
defines black speech as follows:

By Black speech I mean the speech of the majority of Black people in this

country, and I do not exclude the speech of so-called educated people. By

Black speech, I also imply a sensitivity to an understanding of the entire

range of Black spoken language in America. This includes the techniques

and timbres of the sermon and other forms of oratory (1973:31).

There are several forms of black speech which Henderson refers to as ‘‘Black
linguistic elegance.” One such category is called, ‘‘worrying the line,”

... the folk expression for the device of altering pitch of a note ina given

passage or for other kinds of ornamentation often associated with melis-

matic singing in the Black tradition (Henderson 1973:41).

As a solo technique, worrying the line is most often encountered in the gospel
selections which are in slow tempo. This allows the maximum opportunity for
the inventiveness of the soloist in improvisation and building an emotional
climax. Aretha Franklin’s early gospel recording of the hymn, “We'll Never
Grow Old” is a classic example of worrying the line with the added device of
word repetition to build dramatic impact:

There is a land where we'll never, never,

n-e-v-e-r growold....

Interaction between the congregation and the gospel performer is a tradi-
tion which has been observed in a similar pattern among Africans by Herskovits
(1958:152). Audience involvement and participation is vitally important in the
total gospel experience. Interjections and responses to singers such as, “go head,”
“that’s alright,” ‘“‘yes, suh,” and “sho’ nuf’ are common practices which act
as an emotional catalyst to spur the singers on. Among the Africans, Roberts
(1972:176) noted that during the narration of traditional tales by the griots it
was considered impolite to listen “dumbly” without response in some
appropriate comment. This response trait is clearly traceable in the accounts
of black sacred and secular situations. One is as likely to encounter interaction
between performer and audience at Harlem’s Apollo theatre as in the gospel
church. Passive audience attitudes are Western European aesthetic norms.

The charismatic appeal of the gospel singer’s performance style has been
effective in dramatizing the song lyrics as well as serving as a gauge of his
intense emotional involvement, often called “gettin? happy” or “feeling? the
spirit.” The greatest gospel performers utilize movement, tonal contours, and

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:41:49 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 13 ---
384 ETHNOMUSICOLOGY, SEPTEMBER 1975
verbal expressiveness in a manner of total consummation. Ben Sidran makes
the following description:

The ability to perform music at the peak of emotional involvement, to be

able to maintain the pitch of this involvement, and continue the process of

spontaneous composition separates black entertainment from almost all of

Western tradition. This stage presence, which accounts for the impact of the

black personality on the entertainment industry in general and the music

industry specifically, is reinforced in black churches today (1971:47).

The dance which is an essential part of African religious ritual was
carried over into the religious worship practices of the slaves where it was
known as “ring shouts.” Several accounts of these were published in maga-
zines around the 1860s, the most famous of these being found in the Nation
of May 30, 1867. There are descriptive parallels which also occurred in the
camp meetings of the white revivalists of the 1890s. However, the shout, or
the holy dance may be an instance in the mutual accommodation of similar
cultural patterns of African and American origins.

Finally, in the broad spectrum of Afro-American arts which retain roots
of the African heritage, black gospel music has the unique position of close
proximity to purely African related origins. It is that which is instantly heard
and felt in the presence of the gospel sight-and-sound experience. Further-
more, it is to be desired and anticipated that gospel music will not abandon
its significant and singular role as the dominant force in the preservation of
black cultural identity. Because it is a profound statement of black culture, it
is hoped that the acceptability, respectability and universal receptivity to
gospel music will not eventually bring a “‘kiss of death” and route to the
dilution of this art form. It is imperative that black gospel maintain its
strong self-identity and continue as the positively crystallizing element in the
emerging black aesthetic.

REFERENCES CITED

Bastide, Roger

1971 African Civilizations in the New World. London: C. Hurst & Co. First

published in 1967 as Les Amériques noires.

Chase, Gilbert

1955 America’s music. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc.
Courlander, Harold

1963 Negro folk music, U.S.A. New York: Columbia University Press.
de Lerma, Dominique-Rene, et al.

1970 Black music in our culture. Kent Ohio: Kent State University Press.
Garland, Phyl

1969 The sound of soul. Chicago: Henry Regnery.
Gayle, Addison Jr., et al.

1971 The Black Aesthetic. New York: Doubleday and Co., Inc.
Heilbut, Tony

1971 The gospel sound. New York: Simon and Schuster.

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:41:49 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 14 ---
WILLIAMS-JONES: AFRO-AMERICAN GOSPEL MUSIC 385
Henderson, Stephen, et al.
1973 Understanding the new black poetry. New York: William Morrow and Co.,
Inc.
Herskovits, Melville
1958 The myth of the Negro past. Boston: Beacon Press.
Jones, LeRoi
1963 Blues People. New York: William Morrow and Co., Inc.
McPherson, Holland, Banner, Weiss, Bell
1971 Blacks in America, Garden City, N.Y. Anchor Books/Doubleday & Co., Inc.
Nettl, Bruno
1965 Folk and traditional music of the western continents. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall; Inc.
Roach, Hildred
1973 Black American music past and present. Boston: Crescendo Publishing Co.
Roberts, John Storm
1972 Black music of two worlds. New York: Praeger Publishers.
Sidran, Ben
1971 Black talk. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Smith, Donald
1969 ‘The Gospel Way” Sunday magazine. The Washington Star Newspaper. Jan.
26.
Southern, Eileen, ed.
1971 Readings in Black American Music. New York: W. W. Norton and Co.
Standifer, James, Barbara Reeder
1972 Source Book of African and Afro-American Materials for Music Educators.
Washington, D.C. Music Educator’s National Conference.
Szwed, John F.
1970 “Afro-American Musical Adaptation,” in Afro-American Anthropology. New
York: The Free Press,
Washington, Joseph R.
1973 Black Sects and Cults. New York: Anchor Press. First published in 1972.
Williams, Martin
1961 Where’s the melody? New York: Minerva Press.
Work, John W.
1949 “Changing patterns in Negro folk song,” Journal of American Folklore
(April-June).
DISCOGRAPHIC REFERENCES
Aretha Franklin: Amazing Grace (1972). 33 1/3 rpm. Two 12” disc. Atlantic Records
2-906.
Clara Ward: Packin’ Up. 33 1/3 rpm. Savoy 14020.
Edwin Hawkins: More Happy Days. 33 1/3 rpm. Buddah M 85064.
James Cleveland: Peace Be Still. 33 1/3 rpm. Savoy Records MG 14076.
Mahalia Jackson: At Newport (1958). 33 1/3 rpm. Columbia CL 1244.
Negro Church Music: 33 1/3 rpm. Atlantic 1351.
Sam Cooke and the Soul Stirrers: 33 1/3 rpm. Specialty S 2116.
Staple Singers: The Best of the Staple Singers. 33 1/3 rpm. Buddah 2009.
The Gospel Sound: Twenties to the Sixties. 33 1/3 rpm. Columbia G 31086.
This content downloaded from
128.120.235.175 on Mon, 08 Aug 2022 15:41:49 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
