--- Page 1 ---
i
|
i
CHAPTER 9
Rhythm and Blues
Portia K. Maultsby
I
fe
f
INTRODUCTION
eee
During the World War II era (1939-1945) and the two decades that
, followed, African American musicians created new musical styles po ene 23,
labeled “rhythm and blues” by music and trade magazines. Produced Rhythm and
primarily by small independent record labels, rhythm and blues con- blues (R&B)
sists of many hybrid styles that derive their core elements from blues, © Acombo form
Jazz, spirituals, and gospel music. The creators of this music were of of Black dance
two different generations, from different regions of the country, and = sic that
of diverse musical backgrounds. These variables contributed to their | *Merged sutig
_ the World War tt
production of an eclectic mix of rhythm and blues styles. Former a GRA ia at
jazz and blues musicians comprised the first generation of musicians bitispl Saal swing ;
(pre-World War Il). They joined forces during the World War II era jazz elernents.
to create varied hybrid forms (jazz-blues, jazz-pop, jubilee-jazz, etc.) Also associated
categorized under four major subgenres: solo artists, combos (seven | with various
or eight instrumentalists), trios, and vocal harmony groups. hybrid vocal
| Teenagers and young adults raised in urban environments styles.
constituted the second generation of performers (post-World War Il). ,
They built on the models of the pioneering groups to evolve
contemporary styles that represented their musical values, cultural
| sensibilities, and experiences. Black chutch music—jubilee and gospel
songs—rather than blues and jazz was the most influential in shaping
the sound of the second generation of rhythm and blues performers,
distinguishing it ftom that of their predecessors.
The musical repertoire of the first- and second-generation groups
was diverse, encompassing novelty songs, pop standards, ballads, and
245

--- Page 2 ---
—
an eclectic mix of blues, jazz, spirituals, and gospel-flavored songs. aS asin
With few exceptions and adhering to the social practices of a segre- = sChoard maz:
gated society, record labels initially promoted these groups exclusively Dies” recoré.
in African American communities. By the mid-1950s, however, some Ese" la Poe

pop-oriented labels began to notice that the growing White teenage ior examfie.

population showed a preference for the beat and sound of Black popu- 221 advocates
lar music. To capitalize on this new consumer market, some labels, Seeted the
especially Mercury, RCA, Coral, and Dot, recorded White artists sing- Actericans—>.
ing pop-styled versions of newly released rhythm and blues songs. Tvand pop-sr
Known as “covers,” these sanitized renditions provided American aor 10s
popular music and pop radio with anew sound. When White teenag- .cnger he:d =

ers discovered the original artists, covers became passé. Despite the Bilbozrs :

growing preference for Black artists, the major labels resisted sign- -sainet the
ing them to their rosters. Instead, their executives contracted White Setter alterme:
artists who they described as having a Black feel and a Black sound z8 € generic <
(see Reebee Garofalo’s discussion in Chapter 15). Rhythm and blues erat honmie =
artists, nevertheless, gradually entered into the mainstream but under angas Ces

the label rock ’n’ roll (also rock and roll). cnc Blues” =

The rock ’n’ roll films produced by Hollywood and the national emerged since
broadcast of the television dance show American Bandstand (beginning Seis ree
in 1957) gave unprecedented exposure to rhythm and blues artists. The comfiguration:
films Rock.and Roll Revue (1955), Rock, Rock, Rock (1956), and Don’t Knock — aecurin Bs
the Rock (1957) featured Joe Turner, Faye Adams, Ruth Brown, the “Ents COM
Larks, Little Richard, Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers, Chuck Berry, ned begun t27
and the Flamingos. Unlike the rock ’n’ roll films, American Bandstand 1, 1968) :

showcased Aftican American artists whose repertoire and image were ech ane.s

acceptable to middle-class White America. Jackie Wilson, Chuck Berry, zr. Affican An
Chubby Checker, Little Anthony and the Imperials were among this ‘em eclectic 2
group. Even though the mass media promoted African American art- rnafige in 1a>.

Rock ’n’ roll ists as rock ’n’ roll performers, these artists identified their repertoire =e a
1950s derivative and musical style as rhythm and blues. ISe, WeGies
of rhythm For example, in an on-camera interview with Fats Domino for the “‘rranization >
and blues, video Rock and Roll: The Early Days, Domino is asked how rock ’n’ roll ieeeaswer |
characterized by got started. He responds: “Well, what they call rock ’n’ roll now is Tr>moters. ar
Black gospel ane really rhythm and blues. I’ve been playing it for fifteen years in New Adecade*
ee Orleans.” Similarly, Les Eisiaete original drummer Charles “ae charts. = |
consumption by Conner described rock ’n roll as “thythm and blues played with a fast SoBe Muss.
Black and White beat.” This chapter chronicles the emergence and development of the “sic im Satie
teenagers. styles that comprise the rhythm and blues tradition: their meaning, chat wR penaSs
function, and significance in Black community life; their treatment <8 $55. Tf SRO.

by the music industry as a mass-marketed commodity; and their J OER: Barely

influence in redefining the direction of American popular music.

: ay Cre
DEFINITION OF TERMS | a

The term “rhythm and blues” was a catch-all term first used by the =, wanon ee
music industry to market all styles of Black music recorded by Blacks nce be
246 African American Music @gte Bog Ewes

--- Page 3 ---
exclusively for Black consumers. The term was created in 1949 when
Billboard magazine renamed its “Race” records charts “Rhythm and ~ Race records
Blues” records. During the decades following the Civil War, the term Music industry
“race” had positive connotations with reference to Aftican Americans. . term used
For example, the label “race men” was used to identify Black politi- . through the |
cal advocates in the community. Record companies, in turn, appro- 1940s to
priated the label “race” in 1920 to market the recordings of Aftican designate
Americans—blues, jazz, spirituals, religious services, sermons, novel- on
ty, and pop-oriented songs—exclusively to Black communities. By the CS d 3 d
late 1940s, the race label had acquired negative connotations and no ip ken
longer held currency among African Americans. Amaricans,
Billboard’s editorial staff responded to this shift by campaigning
against the use of the “Race” label, favoring “Rhythm and Blues” as a
better alternative. An editorial explained that this term “was chosen
as a generic title to encompass Black music’s evolution, including
down-home blues, big-city blues jamp bands, vocal groups, and torchy
night club singers.” In essence, Billboard employed the term “Rhythm
and Blues” in recognition of the new Black popular forms that had
emerged since the mid-1930s. Many of these forms were derived from
various regional blues styles and were distinguished by unique rhythmic
configurations. Beginning in the mid-1950s, subtle changes had begun
to occur in Black popular music. In particular, performers introduced
various components of Black gospel music, which by the mid-1960s :
had begun to redefine the aesthetic parameters of rhythm and blues.
In 1969, in recognition of this change, Billboard renamed the
rhythm and blues charts “Soul.” Over the next two decades, howev- — Soul music
er, African American popular music continued to evolve. It became Gospel-
very eclectic and stylistically diverse, which prompted yet another influenced
change in labels. In 1982, Billboard replaced the designation “Soul” — African American
with “Black Music,” a term promoted by and representative of the po- | Popular music
litical ideology of the Black Music Association. Formed in 1978, this SiS that began
a rr : to emerge in
organization's objective was to preserve, promote, and protect Black the late 1950s :
music as well as the interests of Aftican American artists, executives, and became
promoters, and others connected with the music industry. popular during
A decade later, racial politics once again dictated the renaming of the 1960s.
the charts. In 1990, Billboard reintroduced the term “R&B” to replace
“Black Music,” noting: “[I]t is becoming less acceptable to identify
music in racial terms.” Furthermore, “R&B as a label is less likely to
create expectations about the race or ethnic origin of the music’s cre-
ators. It should be made clear that Billboard never meant the term
‘black’ to refer to the color of the artists making Black music.”®
SOCIAL CONTEXT
The emergence of rhythm and blues parallels the World War II
migration of southern Blacks who sought better economic and
educational opportunities and an escape from the racial oppression
Rhythm and Blues 247

--- Page 4 ---
and inequalities sanctioned by Jim Crow laws. Abandoning their jobs rhythms (triplet
as domestics, sharecroppers, tenant farmers, and general laborers, Figure 9.1), swin
an estimated 1,500,000 African Americans (nearly 15 percent of the four-notes), an 4
southern African American population) moved to northern and west- lines. Preserving
ern cities. Although these migrants found high-paying jobs in the Jordan’s combo.
wartime industries, life in cities proved to be challenging. Restrictive dom that produc
covenants and agreements among feal estate agents and lending Jordan’s reper
institutions fostered the growth of segregated urban communities.® The latter were b:
The isolation of Black communities nevertheless created con- and delivered in a
ditions ripe for the establishment of a vibrant Black entertainment This song type is i
district in every major city. In this context, the southern migrants You Gonna Ger 1D
transformed rural traditions into urban forms of expression, giving (1945), “Choo Ch
birth to new and diverse musical styles defined by a different kind of Chickens” (1946).
luster, cadence, texture, and sophistication. The underlying aesthetic duced a string of }
of these new styles signified life in the city—the ethos, pulse, factory charts. He perforn
sounds, street noises, and new technologies (amplification and elec- of the color line. 2:
tric instruments) that inspired new musical treatments of African ed in differenr sy
American folk and existing urban forms. musical aesthetic.
al brightly colored
MUSICAL ROOTS AND THE FIRST GENERATION of white people a:
OF PERFORMERS week and a colorec
The first generation of rhythm and blues performers were the pre- class, identified wi
World War Il blues and swing musicians and vocalists who reintet- Black life, which cc
preted these traditions within the context of social and economic -ormance traditior
change. America’s involvement in World War Il (1941-1945), espe-
cially the military draft, altered the nature of social interactions and _
the character of entertainment venues. It led to a drastic reduction of Sane ECE 3d
the male presence in America, personnel instabilities in and the even- _————
tual demise of several swing bands, a decline in ballroom dancing, and = __
the closing of many ballrooms. In response to these changes, smaller Bess
venues came into vogue. Musicians, in turn, formed new bands with
fewer members and developed two distinct new genres—bebop and Ae =
rhythm and blues—and related repertoires. Rhythm and blues is a Fiano
post-World War II manifestation of the prewar traditions of combos, Se
trios, and vocal group styles. , =:
Combos
Arkansas-born Louis Jordan, former vocalist and alto saxophon- oR
ist with Chick Webb’s swing band, ushered in a new musical era in . =e
1938 when he formed Louis Jordan and His Tympany Five. With Lt 4
this group Jordan transformed big band swing into a combo sound ee
by reducing the traditional twelve- to sixteen-member swing band
to a seven-piece ensemble (rhychm section, alto and tenor sax, oe
and trumpet). By 1941, Jordan and His Tympany Five had evolved Pao. i. ee
a unique combo style known as “jamp blues.” It 1s characterized ee ——~
by a twelve-bar blues structure, boogie-woogie bass line, shuffle a
248 African American Music ~~ thm and Blues

--- Page 5 ---
i.
a"
rhythms (triplet quarter note followed by a triplet eighth note; see
' Figure 9.1), swing-style horn riff pattern (of syncopated three- and
four-notes), an alto solo saxophone, and group singing on refrain
} lines. Preserving the fundamental components of big band swing,
Jordan’s combo arrangements encouraged a level of creative free-
i dom that produced a new, spontaneous sound.
i Jordan’s repertoire consisted primarily of blues and novelty songs.
t The latter were based on commentary on urban and rural Black life
i and delivered in a humorous manner that incorporated Black slang.
| This song type is illustrated in “What’s the Use of Gettin’ Sober (When
You Gonna Get Drunk Again)” ( 1942), “G. I. Jive” (1944), “Caldonia”
(1945), “Choo Choo Ch’ Boogie” (1946), “Ain’t Nobody Here but Us
Chickens” (1946), and “Saturday Night Fish Fry” (1949). Jordan pro-
: duced a string of hits on the “Race,” “Rhythm and Blues,” and “Pop”
charts. He performed primarily to segregated audiences on both sides
of the color line, and Blacks and Whites of various social classes relat-
ed in different ways to all aspects of Jordan’s performance—the lyrics, Figure 9.1
musical aesthetic, his engaging showmanship, and his unconvention. Part A gives the most
al brightly colored suits. Jordan recalled: “I made as much money off SO™m™mon SEA ORE
: ’ ae .__ the shuffle rhychm;
of white people as I did off colored; I could play a white joint this the 12/8 notation
week and a colored next.”’ African Americans, especially the working _ in part B represents
class, identified with Jordan’s humorous lyrics about urban and rural a 2 ec ms * a
Black life, which connected them to their southern roots and the per- “hen i ota iy
formance tradition of “down home” or southern blues musicians. Carl MaultsBy,
cal bas SE ole J bee Hejl alas
Drone HE |
epee eee ees —~ toa fGen
a —~* ——— re H
‘ can pi
a a ee
~ bee
SS —=|
1 we 2 . ’
id $7) Seepage eeemaees nearer
aes SS |
) t) y |
ey |
== SS
H
boc?
3 . 4
Rhythm and Blues 249

--- Page 6 ---
Jordan’s cross-cultural appeal flourished during the war years combo tradition (a:
when African Americans experienced overt discrimination in ar- Honeydrippers (“TI
eas such as housing and employment practices, and the lack of Boogie,” 1945), Rox
access to labor unions, job training programs, social services, and Eddie Vinson (“Oh
public accommodations. Vehemently protesting these injustices, Rockin’ Tonight.”
they participated in the “Double V” (Double Victory) campaign, Amos Milburn (“C
a movement that supported a victory against tyranny in Europe (“Deacon’s Hop,” 1
and simultaneously demanded an end to racial inequalities in “Cupid’s Boogie,” §
America. Society’s resistance to this campaign heightened conflicts bo sound also reso
and hostilities between Blacks and Whites that continued decades ing in the Midwes:
after the war.® Nevertheless, performances by Jordan’s combo and Gonna Rock, W’e’>:
other swing-oriented bands led by James “Jimmie” Lunceford, Duke 1948), Sonny Tho
Ellington, Lionel Hampton, and Lucky Millinder, among others, Paul Williams’s “T>
mitigated these conflicts in the few venues that had mixed but often By the end of
segregated audiences. After the United States declared victory over Zent record labels <
Germany in 1945, members of both races celebrated to the music zo national distrib.
of Black swing bands and jump blues-oriented combos. Jordan’s carts of the countr:
“Let the Good Times Roll” (1946) was especially popular since it = styles. Black Pui’:
symbolized economic prosperity and a new era in America’s social ‘sors for record le>
history. For African Americans, this song also signified an end to :ountry. Moreover.
racial inequalities. _- various regions =
The optimism that prevailed among African Americans during ent of local radio
the World War IJ era resonated in the combo styles that dominat- =:stribution netwo
ed Black popular music on the West Coast, especially Los Angeles. zons spread to otk
During the war years, over 340,000 African Americans migrated to
Los Angeles for high-paying jobs in the aircraft, shipbuilding, and “ries
other war-related industries.” Musicians were a patt of this group. - ztalleling Jordan’
They, as did other migrants, perceived this city “as a kind of promised itvle pioneered an.
land, with many glamorous night spots, sunny weather, and a more sown as “club blz
benign form of racism than in most American cities.”!° Alrhough Los -:scectively, this fe:
. . = ¢
Angeles offered improved economic conditions for Blacks, the city was - +. musical aest>
segregated; the majority of the migrants resided in the South-Central zeles in 1937, Ceo
district. The clubs in this area featured music that appealed to both - =-d around Sox
the middle and working classes. The latter group, according to musi- ~ 27 in the African -
cian Johnny Otis, “favored the blues played with a modern twist.” --xn for his un:
Catering to the working class, the West Coast musicians trans- “= 2°50 became kr.
formed Jordan’s combo model into a distinctive regional rhythm and : “es credit to his
blues sound. This blues-jazz hybrid features guitar and piano styl- ~ ine keys.
ings from the Texas blues tradition, boogie-woogie bass, the shuffle { i= 1937, Cole z
pattern and rumba rhythms (the latter from Cuba via Louisiana), -. oxner of a sr
horn arrangements reminiscent of southwest swing bands, and the ~-: ensemble cor:
“honking” tenor saxophone style (blowing the same piercing low s-Zard to the tr:
and high pitches repeatedly) popularized by Illinois Jacquet in Lionel * *=ssion). Coles
Hampton’s remake of “Flying Home” (1942). These innovations .trerted his me”
produced a new urban dance music that rocked the nation for near- = s-nusicembe.
ly three decades. The pioneers and popularizers of the West Coast } wer ns backs
K
a
-
250 African American Music “~ ord Blues

--- Page 7 ---
ee ‘
|
combo tradition (also known as jump blues) include Joe Liggins & His
Honeydrippers (“The Honeydripper,” 1945), T-Bone Walker (“Sail On
Boogie,” 1945), Roy Milton & His Solid Senders (“R M. Blues,” 1946),
Eddie Vinson (“Old Maid Boogie,” 1947), Wynonie Harris (“Good
( Rockin’ Tonight,” 1948), Mabel Scott (“Elevator Boogie,” 1948),
Amos Milburn (“Chicken Shack Boogie,” 1948), Big Jay McNeely
(“Deacon’s Hop,” 1949), and Johnny Otis (“Head Hunter,” 1949; and
“Cupid’s Boogie,” featuring Little Esther, 1950). The West Coast com-
bo sound also resonated in the instrumentals of musicians record-
ing in the Midwest and on the East Coast—-Wild Bill Moore’s “We're
Gonna Rock, We’re Gonna Roll” (1947), Hal Singer’s “Cornbread”
(1948), Sonny Thompson’s “Long Gone (Parts I & IT)” (1948), and
Paul Williams’s “The Huckle-Buck” (1949),
By the end of the 1940s, Los Angeles boasted eight indepen-
dent record labels specializing in rhythm and blues. Without access
to national distribution networks, this music made its way to other
parts of the country and influenced the development of other region-
al styles. Black Pullman porters on trains served as unofficial distrib-
utors for record labels by transporting and selling records across the
country. Moreover, entrepreneurs launched new independent labels
in various regions throughout the country followed by the establish-
ment of local radio programs to broadcast this music. Through this
distribution network, the West Coast combo and other local tradi-
tions spread to other parts of the country.
Trios
Paralleling Jordan’s development of the combo model was the trio
style pioneered and popularized by jazz pianist Nat “King” Cole.
Known as “club blues” and “cocktail music” in Black and White clubs
respectively, this form is distinguished from combos by instrumenta-
tion, musical aesthetics, and function. Moving from Chicago to Los
Angeles in 1937, Cole performed as a solo jazz pianist in clubs located
in and around South Central Avenue, the major entertainment dis-
trict in the African American community. In these clubs, Cole became
known for his unique piano style influenced by Fatha Earl Hines.
He also became known for his unusual chord voicings, which some
critics credit to his playing on pianos that were out of tune and had
missing keys.'4
In 1937, Cole also formed the King Cole Trio at the request of
the owner of a small Hollywood jazz club frequented by Whites.
The ensemble consisted of piano, bass, and guitar, which became
standard to the trio tradition (many later added drums and other
percussion). Cole’s musicians were jazz performers and their style
supported his mellow yet rhythmic jazz-flavored vocals. Although
Cole’s music embodied an inherent swing feel, his music functioned
primarily as background music for conversation and for listening
Rhythm and Blues 251

--- Page 8 ---
rather than dancing. The King Cole Trio’s repertoire showcased sie oe
Cole’s background in jazz, pop, and classical music. It consisted of eee Bees
humorous/novelty songs that featured group singing (“Scotchin’ aaa &
with the Soda,” 1941; “Hit That Jive, Jack,” 1941; and “Straighten sa. =
Up and Fly Right,” 1943); ballads (“All For You,” 1942; and “If You ao
Can’t Smile and Say Yes,” 1943); scat-singing (“That’s What,” 1947); fone
jazz (“Honeysuckle Rose,” 1940; and “Jumpir’ At Capitol,” 1943); ~ Sen
and blues (“Early Morning Blues,” 1941; “Ain’t That Right,” 1941; ‘Cee
and “Easy Listening Blues,” 1944). Lae
The repertoire of King Cole’s Trio appealed to both Blacks meeps
and Whites, especially the middle class who related to the fluid aS Sree
jazz-pop-blues hybrid sound of his piano and vocals. The success of SSmves=
Cole’s group inspired the formation of similar trios who popularized ‘Sa Ee
the blues aesthetic in this tradition. Blues-based trios quickly became st A
favorites in after-hours clubs that attracted the Black working class. a
This style is associated with Johnny Moore’s Three Blazers (“Drifting ee SEIS
Blues,” 1946) that featured Texas-born singer-pianist Charles Brown. Sgr
Brown later formed his own trio and recorded songs such as “Trouble ab tB es
Blues” (1949) and “Black Night” (1950). 5 asiece ae
Vocal Harmony Groups PGA, eet |
In contrast to the West Coast, the East Coast and parts of the Midwest . 8 eee
became known for a distinctive vocal harmony group style. The of Soa
architects of this style were the pre-World War II vocal groups: The f Se
Mills Brothers, Ink Spots, Delta Rhythm Boys, and the Charioteers. Pt a
The Mills Brothers and Ink Spots had backgrounds in barbershop 7 eg ae
and pop traditions, respectively. They also performed with the big 3% eee
bands of Duke Ellington, Lucky Millinder, and Glenn Miller. The mee ee
Delta Rhythm Boys and the Charioteers were first organized as ; oo ees
jubilee quartets. They sang spiricuals, folk songs, and popular styles. *. |
These early vocal groups consisted of a lead vocalist and supporting | th
background singers characterized by four core features: (1) alternat- 1 -—- ant
ing lead vocals, (2) harmonized choruses, (3) imitation of instrumen- | + ee
tal timbres, and (4) contrast of extreme range and timbre. of paz
The prewar vocal groups pioneered specific musical practices | wPe, Sole
that marked their signature styles and established practices that were | * feats fuck
preserved in the postwar vocal group tradition. The Mills Brothersin-  j bce
troduced Black barbershop harmonies and sounds that mimicked | JE el
musical instruments—trumpet, trombone, tuba, saxophone, and mai
bass—especially the walking bass lines heard in “Tiger Rag” (1931), a5
“Caravan” (1938), and “Paper Doll” (1942). The Ink Spots featured a ~
smooth operatic-flavored falsetto lead vocal that alternated with the TPE
spoken bass voice on choruses. Although some popular music his- i sam,
torians credit the Mills Brothers (“Rockin’ Chair,” 1934) as the first -,
Black vocal group to feature the spoken bass on a record,” the Ink i ne
Spots popularized this concept. This practice became a part of the j _
252 African American Music rite 2

--- Page 9 ---
—_—
group’s distinctive sound beginning with the recording “If I Didn’t
Care” (1939).

While arranging the parts for this new song, tenor Deek Watson
wanted to try something different. He asked bass singer Orville
“Hoppy” Jones to recite the words. Jones “didn’t know the words,”
according to Watson, “so I was whispering the words to him, and he
was repeating them. This made the recording sound the way it does,
with the afterbeat [sic] by Hoppy coming in a beat late.”8 The group
was also known for the changing of tenor leads; the use of subdued

. sustained harmonies on “ooh, oohs” for the background vocals;
and group singing on choruses. The Delta Rhythm Boys and the
Charioteers introduced the harmonies and thythms of the arranged
spiritual tradition (“Dry Bones” and “Joshua Fit De Battle of Jericho,”
1940; “Little David Play on Your Harp,” 1935; and “Swing Low, Sweet
‘ Chariot,” 1938). The Delta Rhythm Boys also featured the bass on
i lead vocals (“Ain’t Gonna Worry Bout a Soul,” 1947; and the ballad
£ “Sweetheart of Mine,” 1949).
i Labeled “pop” singers by music critics and others, the Mills
Brothers and the Ink Spots were the first Black vocal groups to cross
racial boundaries. They recorded for major labels (Brunswick/Decca
and RCA/Decca, respectively) and appeared on mainstream me-
dia—radio, film—and in major performance venues. ‘Their repertoire
was diverse, encompassing novelty songs, pop standards, ballads, and
blues- and jazz-flavored songs. Record labels, however, released more
pop-oriented songs because they reflected the musical tastes of the
broader American society. Popular music historian Jay Warner observed
that many of the releases of the Mills Brothers on British Decca, for
example, did not make it to the United States. The recordings released
in Europe “were generally more jazz and blues oriented songs than
their domestic product” because of difterences in tastes. The domestic
| releases by Decca featured more pop-oriented tunes such as “Till Then”

i ‘1944) and “You Always Hurt the One You Love” (1944). These and
other patterns of aesthetic selectivity contributed to the labelling of
some pre- and postwar Black vocal groups as pop and others as rhythm
and blues. Such characterizations obscured the diverse nature of the
repertoire of these groups.

Record collector-researchers Mike Redmond and Marv Goldberg
offer a useful analysis of the features that distinguished pop and
thythm and blues in the 1950s, They characterize pop as:

~.the group singing the entire song in unison, or group members singing the

chorus or phrase lines behind the lead. Or, in a variation, the group members

singing a smooth, almost subdued blend of harmony without distinctive
tenor to bass parts. In this format, the group provides a showcase for the
lead and remains unobtrusively in the background. The material is presented
in a cool—almost detached manner, and the subject matter is usually non-
controversial in nature avoiding such topics as drinking, crime and associated
societal problems, and overt sexuality,
Rhythm and Blues 253

--- Page 10 ---
ee
Their description of rhythm and blues clarifies how it differs from pop: een’
In contrast, the R&B style employs a prominent, often intricate, background eS a
harmony pattern with distinguishable tenor and bass parts. The material is pre- oe Sees
sented with an emotionally-charged reading reflecting the influence of gospel 2 see, =F
and blues music. The lyrical content of R&B songs is usually more representa- Bs arant __
tive of black cultural patterns of the period. Generally there are more varia- ees
tions in presentation and a greater tendency toward experimentation in R&B 2ST Dre
music- -as opposed to the more stylized pop form. Bez
Finally, Redmond and Goldberg establish the parallels between the es
two seemingly disparate genres: mals
The pop and R&B groups shared a common bond in terms of the importance ot Le :
of the voice relative to instrumental accompaniment. During the 1940s, the ae
groups demonstrated a smooth, almost subtle vocal background with little i= ine a
more than a rhythm section. Quite often members provided guitar and bass wa, rite BEE
fiddle support. Certain groups displayed their virtuosity by emulating musical HSS
instruments....During the developmental period of the R&B sound. through Loa oe
the mid-1950s- background vocals harmony supported minimal instrumenta- oo oe.
tion. To some extent, the group replaced a band; of course most of the young nn
groups developed their sound without instrumental accompaniment.” te
Redmond’s and Goldberg’s above musical analysis reveals that oo.
pop and rhythm anc blues are distinguished by textual content and . &
performance style, the former determined by a culturally defined _
worldview and the latter by culturally defined musical values. — aa
THE SECOND GENERATION OF PERFORMERS ae
Throughout the 1950s, new and youthful a cappella vocal harmony | ag eobly
sounds emerged from street corners, school gyms, city parks, and | womens.
stoops of ctowded apartment buildings in the inner cities. Singing ee
was a diversion from the conditions of poverty encountered by many eT
inner-city youth. Even though the Black middle class experienced in- se ant
cremental progress toward racial equality during the postwar years, late:
the poor and working class witnessed little change in their day to a.
day existence. Becoming successful entertainers, according to Lee 45 =
Andrews of Lee Andrews and the Hearts, was a way “of getting out won -
of the ghetto.”” Building on the models and innovations of the pi- cose
oneering groups, the teenage groups (also known as “street corner” 1 wi &
groups) evolved contemporary vocal harmony styles that represented 3s
their musical values, cultural sensibilities, and lives as city dwellers. ote
They sang about adolescent experiences and fantasies. Furthermore, --_-
groups such as the Ravens and the Orioles are credited with provid- ye
ing the transition from the first generation style to the second gen- on
eration style of vocal groups. ores
The Ravens have been identified by popular music critics and _
historians as the group that bridged the traditions of the pre- and on
postwar vocal harmony groups. Formed in 1945 in New York City, oe:
the Ravens were the first postwar group to repeat the career lon- oe
gevity of their prewar predecessors. Their repertoire included pop io
254 African American Music eet 3k

--- Page 11 ---
'
|
standards and ballads performed in a style similar to the prewar
groups. However, the Ravens brought a contemporary interpretation
co the vocal group tradition by providing a jazz-blues treatment of
songs. They also institutionalized the practice of Delta Rhythm Boys
that featured the bass voice on leads (“OP Man River,” 1947; “Count
Every Star,” 1950).
Formed in 1946 in Baltimore, the Orioles are considered to be the
first bona fide rhythm and blues vocal harmony group. According to
second-generation members Jerry Holman and Diz Russell, the group
specialized in romantic ballads sung in a quiet, mellow “romantic”
style as opposed to a “rhythmic” style. Russell described the latter
as having a constant rhythmic pulse provided by background sing-
ers. A steady rhythm would have restricted the freestyle, yet subtly-
interpreted lead vocals of singer Sonny Til of tke Orioles. His objective
was to establish a romantic mood that corresponded to that of post-
war societal norms:
People wanted to become close. Their loved ones were coming back from the
war.... The theme was trying to get close to each other. You can’t get close to 7
nobody on the dance floor, jitterbugging, so ballads were the best medium...
So it put you in a different frame of mind...to fall in love?
The unique style of the Orioles was inspired by Black religious
music more so than by the jazz and pop styles of their predecessors.
The highly lyrical vocal style as well as the phrasing, shading, and
timing of the lead singer Sonny Til are closely aligned with the smooth
style of the jubilee quartet lead singers. The background harmonies
are derived from “church-type harmonies”—constructed from “top to
bottom.” Russell explains that the bass sings the root or bottom of
chords, the baritone the third, and the first tenor “floats” around the
fifth of the chord. The concept of the floating tenor resulted from
a technical challenge. According to Russell, tenor Alexander Sharp
could not maintain his part. “So he would sing an obbligato [part]
»ehind what was going on in the harmony. And this became centtal
to the style of the Orioles,”™ as did the alternating of the second Doo-wop
tenor-baritone lead. The Orioles’ romantic style is illustrated in songs Typically, a
such as “It’s Too Soon to Know” (1948), “Forgive and Forget” (1949), . cappella vocal
and “Crying in the Chapel” (1953). The Orioles became the model for harmony
subsequent rhythm and blues harmony groups (Five Keys, Swallows, | groups that
Penguins, and other “bird” groups), many of whom gradually develop- | emphasized the
ed their own unique sound. rhythmic delivery
The romantic-styled harmony groupsacquiredanewsoundwhen | °F P et aan
Spani « s consisting
the Spaniels and Moonglows added the phrase “doo-doo-wop” (also om veredilan
doo-doo-wah) and the Moonglows started to use the “blow harmony” (syllables
technique. The “doo-doo-wop” concept can be described as a combi- without
nation of vocables (syllables without meaning) extended and treated meaning)
rhythmically for the purpose of adding movement to romantic songs such as
Figure 9.2). James “Pookie” Hudson, lead singer of the Spaniels, doo-doo-wop.
Rhythm and Blues 255
4

--- Page 12 ---
Fae —— jp
Ft
a
doo doo doo doo doo
cg es
a ee ee
doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo
Figure 9.2 explained that the bass voice imitated the “walking” string bass as-
Examples:of sociated with jazz. The Spaniels popularized this concept in “Baby,
BaG-Wep” plisee It’s You” (1953) and “Goodnite Sweetheart, Goodnite” (1954). The |
Moonglows added yet another dimension to the “doo-doo-wop” con-
cept when they developed the technique of blowing while singing the ‘
phrase “ooh-ooh-wee-ooh-oohwee-oohwee” into the microphone on
“Sincerely” (1954) and “Most of All” (1955) to create a different kind
of vocal effect (Figure 9.3). The innovations of the Moonglows and
Spaniels became standard features of the background vocals of har-
mony groups, ushering in the “doo-wop” era.
4 d. L a Lo le |
coh + - - - ooh - wee - ooh - - - oohwee - oohwee
Figure 9.3 Although vocal harmony groups traditionally sang without "
a harmony” instrumental accompaniment, record labels frequently added partial !
myenm. or full combo instrumentation to their recordings. This accompant- i
ment accentuated the rhythmic element and added a blues flavor to
the tradition. Combo-styled harmony groups also introduced a dif-
ferent way of presenting song lyrics by employing double entendre,
a linguistic device that masked sexual inferences. The combo style
broadened the spectrum of the vocal group tradition, as illustrated '
in the Clovers’ “Don’t You Know I Love You” (1951) and “One Mint
Julep” (1952); Billy Ward and His Dominoes’ “Sixty Minute Man”
(1951), “Have Mercy, Baby” (1952), and “Pd Be Satisfied” (1952); |
and Clyde McPhatter & The Drifters’ “Money Honey” (1953) and
“Whatcha Gonna Do?” (1955). :
The combo sound associated with these vocal groups reflect-
ed changes that had evolved since the 1940s. In the 1950s, teenag-
ers became the major consumer group for popular music. Record
labels began to target the rapidly growing African American popu-
lation by signing Black teenage performers to their roster. Imperial,
Specialty, and Aladdin in Los Angeles and Atlantic in New York City
were among the first labels to search for young Black talent. New
Orleans jazz bandleader Dave Bartholomew (Figure 9.4) and former
Northwest Territory jazz bandleader Jesse Stone (Figure 9.5), both
256 African American Music =e

--- Page 13 ---
Wet! tire |
aie Figure 9.4
i, Dave Bartholomew,
—: . bandleader,
a 4 " songwriter, and
, x aa arranger—producer for
é wat hy Imperial, Specialty,
Ms “ _— | and Aladdin Records.
ok aa, Courtesy Archives
: Ye os T° of African American
" A mJ s Music and Culture,
, ae . ae Indiana University.
“ee ts " ge
i) F\ i 8
bes ek 4
ae OG ; j i
ee 6 eof * i
, MB
: i? % eee
| ee yep :
be f p e '
St Phillip \% So Be a x
Publishing @o. ee oe Pe f ss
1616 He Gatoas %, ye A Porters Mhate Mews
Miu Orleans La, 709 ’
|
| ge eta ae By A itaesy Figure 9.5
ie s a - " Jesse Stone,
+. es Be i bandleader,
— ag - Re j songwriter, and
— ” * at ——— for Atlantic Records,
_ 7 i? . £ eee Courtesy Portia K.
he ane. a a 5 x Fea
F y et % beni ry * °° a
ee “eee.
Po x : Mega: Sauna. OF ai ¢ = ‘
GON a eae ee Gan fee ‘
Bene SN SAS Sea etn, ts 4, df Bt
Me ie I TS key
Me ea ‘ammo 6 Oe cello
PR Beek hes ae SS oe
: | aS ae oa ae ee : ¥ '
oe Te Oe ne ss ei oe bi i f , — Pa is
Brae gee Pee i a a) fe
MS z ee “a. eae | F
3 Pee Pc ioe oo ys bie il
ee Cp ee
ONE Sa eee
Rhythm and Blues 257

--- Page 14 ---
| ~
Figure 9.6 —p- si —3-— | 3
Rumba rhythm from Homs 7S SS SSS SS | ieee oe
Dave Bartholomew’s + 5 —=
“Country Girl.” 5
Pe ee —
bis SS SS SS
SS
African Americans, served as talent scouts and songwriter~arranger- ‘ —
producers for these labels. F
Bartholomew and Stone created new forms of urban dance | =
music by modifying the rhychms and arrangements of West Coast t ee Eee
rhythm and blues to conform to the dance styles of southern ! —_—
Black teenagers. Drawing from the Cuban rumba that was popu- '
lar in New Orleans, Bartholomew created a new rhythmic groove t ii ee nh
for combos. He explained: “Everybody was always talking about : ee
the rumba. I took the bass [pattern] from the rumba and put it my { —_
saxophone. Then I had the [string] bass do what we called the walk” H
(Figure 9.6). Bartholomew later assigned the rumba rhythm to the =
[string] bass “so I could get a bigger sound doubling the horns with ; — 25
the bass.”2° Eats Domino added triplets and rolling fifth and octave '
figures from the Texas piano-blues tradition to Bartholomew’s for- ‘
mula, producing a distinctive New Orleans rhythm and blues sound. | a
Under Bartholomew’s guidance, several artists recorded hit songs, in- | +
cluding Fats Domino’s “The Fat Man” (1949), “Goin’ Home” (1952), '
and “Ain’t That a Shame” (1955); Lloyd Price’s “Lawdy Miss Clawdy” :
(1952); Shirley & Lee’s “Pm Gone” (1952); and Smiley Lewis’s “I Hear i om
You Knocking” (1955). Seep
Jesse Stone pioneered a slightly different regional sound by mod-
ifying the boogie-woogie bass line, which he believed “was too busy
and didn’t fit the dances kids were doing at that particular time.” | a
Similar to Bartholomew, be adapted the boogie-woogie to the rumba | - = BE
and further simplified the horn arrangements “to give the kids the
kind of expression they were looking for.” Stone’s formula, which ‘
became known as the Atlantic sound (see Figure 9.7), produced hits ‘ eee ee
for many of Atlantic’s artists: Ruth Brown’s “S-10-15 Hours” (1952); : aS so
the Clovers’ “Don’t You Know I Love You” (1951), “One Mint Julep” i
(1952), and “Good Lovin” (1953); and Joe Turner’s “Shake Rattle '
and Roll” (1954). These and other recordings produced by Stone a
established Atlantic as a major recording label in the rhythm and 22S
blues market. i
RHYTHM AND BLUES IN TRANSITION { i
From the mid- to lare 1950s, Black musicians (most of whom were in t FF
their teens and early twenties) evolved Louis Jordan’s combo modelin —
new directions. Little Richard was the catalyst—he introduced a new hn  & ane
rhythmic concept to the tradition. Charles Conner, Little Richard’s lhe
original drummer (Figure 9.8) explains: a
258 African American Music oe gets B

--- Page 15 ---
>
ia)
| Bassline Sg SS j
a eT Eg oe oe fh a
|
!
I 3 6 z @.
jt = : ma a Ft
5
SS — a ome
Be — = a St oe = SS FS
7
Fee a ==
| rt to = 3 =
i
i)
(b)
% = ype T LS ee eee
She —S SS
: )
S) Ree a We = > oo - ———
; ee SS eS
| ee — —S—=
il
é \
a 1 i
a a oh oe Seb
ee ee Sesh aS
ee tt es ee a = to —s
I = —— = —
E
| {c) F
f —-j—-—— 3 ey 3S
" c— . te? oN =
, we 22 a SS = SSS
i —— —— =
pb
$ 4 =i ee he m3
fj * 2. = Ly a ee bore Ne os it seen
i EE Ff = (re =
P Sg a = a Spo
ie
F c
| 7 —I—s Sg 3
ie faite Gee T = a ret
7 : sae es : eet SS = = — Ce. a
| os = ee =a
i I
’
i F
1 ——— —~j—. —I—
iG = = ae pe == ao
ot re a | ne re nt
Figure 9.7
; Examples of the “Atlantic Sound,” transcribed from a series of piano demonstrations by Jesse Stone. a: Boogie-woogie
# bass line adapted by Jesse Stone in the creation of the “Atlantic Sound,” b: Atlantic Records’ formulaic bass line, illustrated
, in Stone’s rendition of the bass pattern for “5-10-15 Hours.” ¢: An alternate transcription of “5-10-15 Hours” that more
z accurately illustrates the triplet feel.
q
Rhythm and Blues 259

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 9.8 pili their own iden=:
Charles Conner, aa Ys . American cultu:
original drummer i oe hangi
for Little Richard. - . bon, | a anging tastes
Courtesy Charles ane eo 5 ee sions of rhythr:
Conner and the ee Pe se original artists ;
Archives of African z Bes ate ics S
American Music and % ee, a 7 ae
Culture, Indiana 4 ao ; 4 4 versions into t=
University. ¥ a iain . 4 | TeSIONS of the ¢
Bee Soe cee Moffitt explaiz:
re Bae q Dretense to me.
bb? we cneness of inne:
ee “e eye a, é . h
eae q bie $s ¥ ™ _ ‘ .
oC oe se siusic that cov.
es , as a ia = ‘ ae i i
aa a ty z2rparts, incluc
z ie a sag. King vies
Y: Se would hee
i Sew York Cir
, “eat Wag tle:
of , ~2 became cies
; _e “a: ‘ %
«08s ime Mis Pee:
i ee oa ht -_-
: ae -=2 Diack nets:
ae -2gaborhooe:
S.<ambution =
In rhythm and blues, you had a shuffle with a back-beat, but Little Richard ~~ whig ate
wanted something different. He wanted something with more energy, but aoe
Sa mrss
he didn’t know how to describe the notes. So Richard brought me down to oe —
the train station in Macon, Georgia in 1954 and he said, “Charles, listen to IIA Reign coe:
the choo-choo train sryle.” I said, you probably want 8th notes or 16th notes. wi "UReDOx an
We went back to his house couple of days later...and we came up with that beat. 2.225 records .
Now, nobody had ever played that beat before.”® suene: Bath oa
5, 2 cess
Little Richard’s choo-choo beat was a integral part of many national ocean aa
and crossover hits, including “Tutti Frutti” (1955), “Long Tall Sally,” “be Soe
(1956) and “Lucille” (1957). Doo-wop groups adapted this beat to their og ee
songs, as did Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers (“I Want You to Be My = game ae
Girl,” 1956), The Cadillacs “Speedo,” 1955; and “Peek-A-Boo,” 1958), “he Lae
and The El Dorados (“At My Front Door,” 1955). Richard’s choo-choo 4 ae Sees Se
beat also became known in the mainstream as the rock’n’ roll beat. * he sees,
Bo Diddley and Chuck Berry made the 1950s combo style more, BEA aaa
accessible to White teenagers by establishing the guitar as the fo- *< {sees
cal instrument. Diddley’s rhythmic guitar style and rumba rhythms. MG BF By
(“Bo Diddley” and “Pretty Thing,” 1955) and Berry’s more melodic : vag “eon
approach and novelty lyrics (“Maybellene,” 1955; and “Roll Over ‘,, augers |
Beethoven,” 1956) appealed to the musical tastes and cultural values { » 8S eee
of all of America’s youth. ad Bae
The new combo and vocal group sounds of Black teenagers did | « ne See Be
not go unnoticed by White youth. Rejecting the mainstream values Ag att
and musical preferences of their parents, they sought to establish see
260 African American Music se Se ll

--- Page 17 ---
their own identity through music, dance, fashion, and style. African
American culture served as the primary resource. Catering to the
changing tastes of White teenagers, record labels provided cover ver-
sions of rhythm and blues. The late-night radio broadcasts of the
original artists on Black-oriented radio and specialized network ra-
dio programming, however, catapulted the original rhythm and blues
versions into the bedrooms of White youth. These youth from all
regions of the country gravitated to this music. Southerner Phillip
Moffitt explained, “The white Pop music of the day seemed full of
pretense to me, while this raw music somehow captured the genu-
ineness of inner feeling... There was an authentic spontaneity in chat
music that could only have come from the black experience.”2°
ji Rhythm and blues also resonated with Moffitt’s northern coun-
i terparts, including aspiring songwriters Neil Sedaka and Carole B.
‘ King. King viewed rhythm and blues as an entry into Black culture:
; “We would hear them [black artists] on a late night show on WINS
t [New York City] and this had something that we were not familiar
| with. It was this interest in another culture that we got close to and
we became close to through the music.”% Sedaka explained that he
| and his friends searched “for these [rhythm and blues] records in
the black neighborhoods because you couldn’t get them in white
| neighborhoods except the Pat Boone covers.”3! The racially defined
distribution practices of the music industry prevented easy access
to this music,
| The increasing number of White teenagers thar ventured into
Black neighborhoods to purchase this music prompted retail outlets
and jukebox operators in White neighborhoods to stock rhythm and
blues records. In an attempt to obscure the racial origins of rhythm
and blues and the identity of its performers, the music trade press,
pop radio, and record companies relabeled the music “rock 1’ roll.”
The production of rock ’n’ roll Hollywood films, live rock ‘n’ roll
shows, and the television dance program American Bandstand situated
rhythm and blues at the center of American popular culture, causing
consternation among Whites, especially southerners. They artribut-
ed the deteriorating values, unruly behavior, and rebellious spirit of
White youth to the influences of rhythm and blues. In protest, the
Citizens Council of Greater New Orleans, Inc., formed coalitions with
other segregationist Stoups to protest the promotion, sale, and radio
broadcast of thythm and blues. As Part of the campaign to rid society
of this “licentious jungle music,” the Citizen’s Council distributed
flyers (Figure 9.9) and organized press conferences and public meet-
ings to publicly express their opposition.
. The popularity of rhythm and blues among Whites occurred
y at a pivotal point in race relations in society. In the mud-1950s, the
Supreme Court ruled the unconstitutionality of segregated public
schools, southern Blacks launched the Civil Rights Movement,
Rhythm and Blues 261

--- Page 18 ---
7 —"
: "

Figure 9.9 | oT 8) EStear: S

A flyer campaigning | » 2 Shee wee.

| against “Negro So “.

Records,” distributed | ae ees

| by the Citizen’s cet ogrsceco o>
| Council of Greater

| New Orleans, @ : PISSED
| c. 1950s. Courtesy

| Archives of African ELLER TENT MSM LE LRT RE | * 238 ERS =

| American Music and | ‘eee.

Culture, Indiana ~~ Be _ _,

| University. Ss T o Pp 2 “EEA ant

| ee ae

! :telp Save The Youth of America co nase,

; ae Bee

DONT BUY NEGRO RECORDS we oe

(tf you don’t want to serve negroes in your place of business, cere

then do not have negro records on your juke box or listen to _ ss toegs-

negro records on the radio.) Soo Br

The screaming, idiotic words, and savage music of these records Sse |

are undermining the morals of our white youth in America. * 2882 Bere

Call the advertisers of the radio stations that play this type of ager eeEe =

music and complain to them! wae STE Se

Don't Let Your Children B List "

oni Ler jour waren buy, Or Listen T> terse

To These Negro Records a

eh ieee Sees a ta area acca "wee Soe

For additional copies of this circular, write Te 2 ei

CITIZENS’ COUNCIL OF GREATER NEW ORLEANS, INC. nl

G09 Delta Building Now Orleans Lovisiana 70112 © SR esr See

Permission is granted to re-print this ctebitler oe ; ~ a Sanne

Ml” . a i ESSE Be

Senator Joseph R. McCarthy organized the anti-Communist cam- iin SSE ES

paign, and southern White citizens’ councils mounted protests 4» oP oes

against school desegregation, race mixing, and the marketing of rock 23

’n’ roll (rhythm and blues) across racial boundaries.” + gig Suda.

Despite lawsuits and various forms of protests to rid the nation Paras?

of this “jungle” music, rhythm and blues remained popular among Hees: SS

White youth. Record labels, eager to cater to the musical tastes of this zemmies

group, pondered new and noncontroversial strategies to market 2 eer oy

this music across racial, class, and generational lines. For example, MRS ge se

they produced African American artists singing pop and country sas B68

262 African American Music “agen goog

--- Page 19 ---
i
—_ |
i and western standards. They also diluted the Black sound in rhythm
I end blues recordings by applying Tin Pan Alley or pop production
zechniques. In essence, record labels attempted to assimilate Black
srtists into the mainstream of American popular music.
: ~ROSSOVER FORMULAS
i
When the pop-oriented vocals and lyrics of the Platters (“Only
| Tou,” 1955;"The Greac Pretender,” 1955; “My Prayer,” 1956; and
“Twilight Time,” 1958) became hits in both the rhythm and blues
and pop markets, the group demonstrated its cross-cultural and
<Toss-generational appeal. Even though Mercury had signed the
Platters reluctantly, the company quickly realized the broad cross-
over potential of homogenized rhythm and blues artists. Mercury
and Atlantic were the first labels to explore crossover musical con-
cepts in rhythm and blues recordings. The Primary objective was
tO create new musical formulas designed to retain Black teenage
consumers and simultaneously expand the market for rhythm and
blues across racial and class lines.
Similarly, record labels sought to create a Black sound that would
oe palatable for airplay on pop radio and acceptable to mainstream
America. To achieve this goal, Atlantic replaced songwriter-produc-
er Jesse Stone with the White team of Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller.
Preserving the aesthetic of the 1950s combos, they produced teen-
age-oriented novelty songs that featured comic lyrics and a playful
! vocal style that appealed to Blacks and Whites alike. The Coasters
‘ popularized this style in “Down in Mexico” (1956), “Searching”
{ (1957), and “Young Blood” (1957).
i To target an older crossover audience and gain acceptance on Crossover
: pop radio, Leiber and Stoller employed pop production techniques ~ The process
by substituting: choruses with sing-along refrains; two or three by which a
| back-up singers with White-sounding choruses; blues and gospel recording
i harmonies with pop harmonies; and combo arrangements with or- — 'eleased in
q chestral arrangements (strings, marimba, tympani, and percussion), Senay
i These features are heard in the recordings of well-established rhythm cite? aehlevds
q , = : , hit status in the
is and blues performers, such as Clyde McPhatter’s “Treasure of Love” niaitethiaen
(1956) and “Long Lonely Nights” (1957); Ivory Joe Hunter’s “Since market.
I Met You Baby” (195 6); and LaVern Baker’s “I Cried a Tear” ( 1958).
| The crossover production techniques employed by Leiber and Stoller
further standardized the “commercial,” formulaic model established
in the mid-1950s by Jesse Stone.
Because Atlantic’s artists frequently became victims of “cover”
records on the major labels, Stone and other songwriter—producers
experimented with strategies to gain a share of the Pop market. Stone,
| the writer of Joe Turner’s twelve-bar blues “Shake, Rattle, and Roll”
(1954) under the name Charles Calhoun, added a sing-along chorus
to this song. The phrase “Shake, Rattle, and Roll” is the source for
Rhythm and Blues 263

--- Page 20 ---
Foe baion % 4 ! 9 A 7 i * : ‘aes a. =
rhythm. iy 5 ‘ , | ; ss , | (“See See Rider,” |
p B b The attempt «
vent the penetrat:
Figure 9.11 > > ditions into the x
The Brazilian habanera z y p p p liv B p p il elements introdux
rhythm. actually spread Biz
the chorus. Based on an expression Stone heard at poker games, it is ey As the mains:
sung four times over eight bars, followed by four bars of a two-line diluted and orig:
response, constituting the concept of sing-along blues. music began to c:
By the late 1950s, Brazilian. baion and habanera rhythms had infil- -ng the 1950s cros
trated can popular music to become the foundation for many rhythm = Black sound. }
and blues songs. Modified versions of the baion (Figure 9.10) landed ma Os combo anc
crossover hits for the Drifters (“There Goes My Baby,” 1959; and “Up -he creation of the
on the Roof,” 1962) and Ben E. King (“Spanish Harlem,” 1960). The “emoved SORE PI
habanera (Figure 9.11) is the rhythmic foundation for the Drifters’ 3.ack aesthetic 1c
“This Magic Moment” (1960) and “On Broadway” (1963). Crossover Maintaining -
formulas tempered the gospel vocal aesthetic and gave rhythm and <soduced the cor:
blues a more urbane sound, which mainstream society found more ws and Pesci
palatable. This sound contrasted with the more spontaneous and een, Gordy ;
less-produced recordings associated with southern-based rhythm =e drumbeats OF
and blues styles. “ents increased =.
The northern or urbane rhythm and blues concept became stan- -exsion between «
dard to Black music production, and it successfully launched many aie The
Black female vocal groups. Young White songwriter-producers, in- ey ae Motown. s
cluding Carole King, Gerry Goffin, Barry Mann, Cynthia Weil, and Phil ce ge _
Spector, as well as the Black songwriter~producer Luther Dixon, pro- =< hlustrated in
vided these groups with songs based on teenage experiences and fan- \ione were the =
rasies. Musical arrangements incorporated “hook lines” (sing-along Saas
repetitive phrases), string arrangements, and Brazilian rhychms nes moans “—
common to crossover formulas. The Chantels’ “Maybe” (1957), the vege ye reais, es
Shirelles’ “Will You Love Me Tomorrow” (1960), the Crystals’ “He’s a -
Rebel” (1962) and “Da Doo Ron Ron” (1963), the Chiffons’ “He’sSo = OFOWDYS TE
Fine” (1963), and the Ronettes’ “Be My Baby” (1963) are among the sade spt e
many songs recorded by successful female groups that crossed over itcard in the >
nto the mainstream and established the commercial viability of “girl i ——
groups” in the music industry. j — i cinimize B.z.
While producing crossover hits, Atlantic and other labels con- “eee Moz
tinued to record blues- and gospel-oriented combo styles, primar- | (eae ae Bae
ily for consumption by the Black working class and southern Black = Sr Gee see
teenagers. Although many crossover artists were popular among a = a
these groups, they remained loyal to performers of the southern- | ee
derived combo tradition. Among favored artists were Joe Turner jf = Soy LOVES 3
(“Corrina, Corrina,” 1956), The Clovers (“Down in the Alley,” 1957°. «eae
Ray Charles (“The Right Time,” 1958 and “What'd I Say,” 1959". naan ae
5
i
264 African American Music . ese sepa BY ce

--- Page 21 ---
-_ ;
' =ite James (“All J Could Do Was Cry,” 1960), and LaVern Baker
“See See Rider,” 1962).
The attempt of record companies and southern Whites to pre-
vent the penetration of Black musical aesthetics and cultural tra-
tions into the mainstream generated the reverse resule. The pop
ziements introduced into rhythm and blues for crossover Purposes
actually spread Black aesthetic qualities further in the arteries of soci- |
ety. As the mainstream became acclimated to a Black sound through
diluted and Original versions, their aesthetic reference for popular — ee
music began to change. Motown Records was instrumental in shift- Motown
-ng the 1950s crossover paradigm toward a culturally defined north- | Record label
. ern Black sound. Known as the “Motown Sound,” it is rooted inthe — created by Berry
j 1950s combo and northern-styled rhythm and blues traditions. In Gordy, named
j the creation of the Motown Sound, Berry Gordy and his musical staff . for its original
removed some Pop elements and reworked others to conform to the location =
k Black aesthetic ideal, BRCaIE, sha ,
y a Bes ; ‘Motor Town.”
Maintaining the combo foundation, Motown’s musicians EDF Uses 9 Sei ws eos awn om
troduced the concepts of polytextured backbeats, jazz-inspired bass
snes, and percussive timbres to the northern rhythm and blues
tradition. Gordy added the guitar, tambourines, and handclaps to
the drumbeats on two and four. The combination of these instru-
ments increased the density of textures on these beats as well as the
tension between the competing rhythmic structures played on other |
instruments, The bass line of James Jamerson was central in defin-
ing the Motown Sound and changing the character of the northern-
styled rhythm and blues. Summarized by Motown historian Dr. Licks
and illustrated in Mary Wells’ “My Guy” ( 1964):
Gone were the two beat, root-fifth patterns and pose-“Under the Boardwalk”
cliché bass lines that occupied the bottom end of most R&B releases. Jamerson
had modified or teplaced them with chromatic Passing tones, Ray Brown style
of walking bass lines, and syncopated eight-note figures—-all which had previ-
ously been unheard of in popular music of the late fifties and early sixties.34
Motown’s musica] atrangements also introduced new concepts
to the rhythm and blues tradition, Although Strings had become
standard in the Productions of this music since the Jate 1950s, ma-
jor labels viewed the addition of Strings as a Way to “sweeten” songs
and minimize Black musical values as a technique for “crossover.” To
the contrary, Motown’s use of strings was Prompted by values deeply
stounded in African American musical aesthetics. Strings were used
as a timbral layer for a fuller sound in conjunction with syncopated
horn lines; they also doubled the vocals, guitar, and bags lines, and
played off the riffs of the rhythm section. Martha & the Vandelles’
“My Baby Loves Me” (1966) illustrates Motown’s innovative Orches-
tral arrangements.
Through Motown’s recordings, the earlier toned-down uptown
rhythm and blues sound re-entered the Mainstream with a different
Rhythm and Blues 265

--- Page 22 ---
eee
twist. This form of musical recycling over time exposed the full tr aese
range of African American aesthetic qualities to the mainstream, es
thus further shifting the aesthetic reference for popular musical Jick =.
expressions toward a Black aesthetic ideal. Initially, the gospel- = eas ea
flavored rhythm and blues music produced at Motown’s south- -oce ot
ern-based counterparts—Stax Records located in Memphis and the saa che.
Fame studio associated with Muscle Shoals, Alabama—was consid-
ered too “gritty,” “hard,” and “rough” for mainstream consump- eee
tion. By the 1970s, and largely due to the mainstream exposure of ~
soul music, their artists such as Otis Redding (“Respect,” 1965; and an
even after his death in 1969), Sam and Dave (“Soul Man,” 1967), oo
Percy Sledge (“When a Man Loves a Woman,” 1966), and Wilson muxregnthiend
Pickett (“In the Midnight Hour,” 1965) had garnered a following —
in the mainstream. In the 1980s, some of their songs began appear- vncviica Fon
ing in Hollywood films such as the Blues Brothers, The Big Chill, and ae
Adventures in Babysitting, as well as in television commercials. ~ eee
In the mid-1960s, the rhythm and blues tradition had begun -—-
to evolve in new directions. Black gospel music became the aesthetic HO
reference as well as the resource for musical content. The “soul” label Tea!
was assigned to this music, thus replacing the rhythm and blues label oar
until 1990, when the label “R&B” resurfaced as a marketing term for eT
Black music. Many of the artists promoted under this label, such as Jini tis.
Keith Sweat (I'll Give All My Love to You, 1990), Toni Braxton (Toni Seen
Braxton, 1992), and R. Kelly (R. Kelly, 1995), recorded mainly ballads, © tte EE
employing a gospel vocal aesthetic. The combo accompaniment is we
replaced by a blend of synthesizers and electric instruments, with an
emphasis placed on the drums and bass. R&B provided an alternative a “ee
to hip-hop, which dominated African American musical expression . ES
throughout the 1990s. i _ fe, 3
CONCLUSION ee
When the music industry instituted a racially defined marketing sys- ae main
tem, the labels assigned to the music did not accurately reflect the = 8
creative endeavors of the musicians. Even though the rhythm and soe 8
blues label was used to market all styles of Black music exclusively to i wt
Black consumers, it implied that all styles of Black music were derived a
from the blues and had a rhythmic focus. To the contrary, African oa
American musicians were versatile they performed in a variety of ~
styles. Moreover, the creations of each generation of musicians repre- at
sented new formulations of blues, jazz, spirituals, gospel, and pop as oa
subgenres of rhythm and blues. Their treatment and transformation
of pop styles gradually and over time changed the aesthetic of pop. | (if
Even though the racially defined marketing practices reflected a
the social policies of a society that segregated the races, the radio .
broadcast of rhythm and blues defied these policies. Through this # &
medium, rhythm and blues crossed racial boundaries and became
266 African American Music - oe

--- Page 23 ---
|
|
popular in the mainstream. Racial politics, however, again dictated
the use of labels—pop and rock ’1’ roll—to conceal the identity of its
Black creators and performers. Regardless of the labels assigned to
Black music to keep it and its creators on the margins, the innova-
tions of Black musicians continued to influence new directions in
and the changing color of the sound of mainstream popular music.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
eee
The research for this essay was conducted with the support of various
institutions and foundations. During my 1999-2000 residency as a
Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences,
Stanford, California, I completed the final stages of research for a
preliminary paper on this topic. I am grateful for the financial sup-
port by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation and the College of Arts
and Sciences, Indiana University-Bloomington.
KEY TERMS
eee
Crossover
Doo-wop
Motown
Race records
Rhythm and blues
Rock ’n’ roll
Soul music
KEY NAMES
ee
Dave Bartholomew
Chuck Berry
Nat “King” Cole
Bo Diddley
The Ink Spots
Louis Jordan
Lieber & Stoller
Little Richard
Mills Brothers
The Moonglows
The Orioles
The Ravens
Jesse Stone
QUESTIONS
eee
1. Identify the various terms Billboard has used to label African
American popular music.
2. When was the term “rhythm and blues” first introduced and
what was its purpose?
Rhythm and Blues 267
