--- Page 1 ---
e 3 e

Hip-Hop’s Founding Fathers

Speak the Truth

Nelson George

Kool DJ Herc. Afrika Bambaataa. Grandmaster Flash. Old School, you say? Hell, these three are

the founding fathers of hip-hop music—the progenitors of the world’s dominant youth

culture. For them, hip-hop is not a record, a concert, a style of dress or a slang phrase. It is the

constancy of their lives. It defines their past and affects their view of the future. As DJs in the

’70s, these three brothers were the nucleus of hip-hop—finding the records, defining the

trends, and rocking massive crowds at outdoor and indoor jams in parts of the Bronx and
Harlem.

What hip-hop was and has become is the subject of the first collective interview involving
Herc, Bambaataa and Flash—the first time, in fact, that Herc has spoken on record in over
ten years. One late summer evening they sat together, first in a Broadway photography studio
and later at The Source’s offices, telling stories, laughing at old rivalries and setting history
straight.

Kool DJ Herc (aka Clive Campbell) used the sound systems of the Caribbean as the model
for his mammoth speaker setup. But the sensibility that led him to scout for obscure records
and mesh beats from blaxploitation soundtracks with Caribbean dance hits, soul grooves and
novelty records was born of the hectic world that was the Bronx during the Carter adminis-
tration. Hip-hop’s sonic montage was conceived by him in city parks and school yards, where
crowds flocked to hear him play, grooving to the beats he unearthed. Fact is, there were no B-
boys until Herc labeled them so.

If Kool Herc is the base, then Bambaataa and Flash are twin pillars who complemented and
extended the original vision. Bam came through New York’s early ’70s gang banging era
unharmed but wiser. Seized by an enormous musical curiosity and a communal vision of
African-American empowerment, he founded the Zulu Nation, the single most enduring insti-
tution in hip-hop. While labels and clubs have come and gone, the Zulu Nation emerged from
the Bronx River Community Center into a collective with adherents around the world. At its
center all these years is Bambaataa, who found musical inspiration in rock, Third World music
and, most crucially, the electronic instrumentation that would support his breakthrough
group, the Soul Sonic Force.

Grandmaster Flash (Joseph Saddler) was a teenager fascinated by records and audio
circuitry. Aside from having a wide musical interest, Flash became intrigued with the possi-
bilities the technology surrounding music suggested for innovation. The concept of
scratching—now the backbone of hip-hop DJing—came out of his laboratory (with an assist
from his friend Grand Wizard Theodore). Flash’s introduction of the “beat box” turned DJs

45

--- Page 2 ---
46 « NELSON GEORGE

from beat mixers to beat makers. And the building blocks of rapping as we know it were laid

by the crew that gathered around Flash—initially, Kid Creole, his brother Melle Mel and the

late Cowboy.

The conversation that evening was wide ranging, including issues of historical detail and
philosophy. Who was the first to scratch a record? Was DJ Hollywood the first hip-hop rapper?
What was the relationship between break dancing and rapping? Who first played “Apache”? These
and other often-debated questions are addressed by the people who were in the eye of the
cultural hurricane.

In a broader sense, Herc, Bambaataa and Flash talk at length about the all-embracing
musical curiosity that inspired hip-hop’s creation and how debates about “hardcore” and “sell-
out” records run contrary to the scene’s roots. The wholesale dissing of women, the increasing
violence between rival rap posses and the control of rap’s manufacture by major corporations
troubles them. The camaraderie of these rivals-turned-griots, the good humor in their
remembrances and the vivid descriptions of epic park parties are a powerful contrast to the
Black-on-Black crime that scars much contemporary hip-hop.

Because of their shared affection and respect, this conversation is not mere nostalgia— it
is a testament to why mutual respect is integral to hip-hop’s future.

AFRIKA BAMBAATAA: Most people today, they can’t even define in words, hip-hop. They don’t
know the whole culture behind it.

GRANDMASTER FLASH: You know what bugs me, they put hip-hop with graffiti. How do they
intertwine? Graffiti is one thing that is art, and music is another.

KOOL Dj HERC: I was into graffiti. That’s where Kool Herc came from.

THE SOURCE: Were people doing tags and shit when you were playin’?

BAM: No, they did tags on the wall. See before the whole word hip-hop, graffiti was there
before that. But really when the Zulu Nation pulled the whole thing together and we laid
down the whole picture. You know, the graffiti and the breakdancers.

HERC: That’s where the graffiti artists were congregating at. Going to the Factory West, or
going to the Sand Pad, or going down to the Nell Guen on 42nd Street, or going to the
Puzzle up there on 167th street, or to the Tunnel. That’s where the graffiti guys used to hang
out. That’s how hip-hop came a long way.

BAM: It was there with the street gang movement. The gangs would’ve started dying down,
but you still had the graffiti crews coming up into the hip-hop culture. Once everything
started coming into place, we started doing shows and traveling into different boroughs.
Then we started traveling to different states and that’s when we threw everything together.

Herc: And the thing about graffiti was, I was the guy with the art. I liked graffiti flyers. My graf-
fiti friend used to do my flyers.

BAM: Sometimes we didn’t need flyers, we just say where we gonna be and that’s where we at.

HERC: Block party, we gonna be over there, be there! That was it.

FLASH: Or what might happen is, if ’m playin’ Pll say “Herc’s givin’ a party tomorrow in the
street,” or if Bam’s playin’, Bam will say, “Flash will be here.”

THE SOURCE: Ok, how does breakdancing, or breaking fit into all that?

FLASH: It was basically a way of expressing how the music sounds. Early breakdancing you
hardly ever touched the floor. I would say, maybe this is a bad comparison, but it was
more like a Fred Astairish type of thing—stylin’ the hat, you know, touchin’, white laces,
finesse, that’s where the two intertwined. It was like just one particular couple would draw
a crazy crowd in the street. Stylin’, nothing sweaty, they wouldn’t break a sweat. Just fly.
Like Eldorado, like Mike, Sasa, Nigger Twins, Sister Boo.

BAM: You had Mr. Rock, the Zulu Queens, the Zulu Kings.

THE SOURCE: So when did it get involved with guys getting’ on the floor?

--- Page 3 ---
HIP-HOP’S FOUNDING FATHERS SPEAK THE TRUTH e 47

BAM: Well the first form of breakdancing started with the street gangs with a dance called “Get
on the Good Foot” by James Brown. There were a lot of women who was really into the
breakdancing too that would tear the guys up in the early stages. But then it all came
together.

HERC: They started to bet money.

BAM: The first era lasted for a while then it died down. And then the second generation came.

HERC: The Puerto Ricans carried breakdancing.

FLASH: They took it to the next level for sure.

HERC: They carried all forms of hip-hop music with dancing.

FLASH: It died for a while then it came back and it was this new acrobatic, gymnastic type of
style.

BAM: And really with some of them, they had been doing this since ’77 and it never really died
with them. Especially with the Rock Steady Crew, the New York City Breakers, and a
couple of those crews.

THE SOURCE: OK, the phrase B-boy. What does that mean to you?

HERC: The boys that break. When somebody go off in the neighborhood, “Yo, I’m ready to
break on somebody,” so we just say B-boys, you know, breakers.

THE SOURCE: So it doesn’t necessarily mean, he’s a dancer? It’s an attitude or somebody who
does something?

FLASH: You don’t have to be a dancer!

HERC: B-boys, these are the boys, these are the boys that break. So we call ‘em B-boys.

THE SOURCE: Let me ask you, is there a time where you remember the whole style of the hat
sideways attitude coming in? Where you said this is a new style as opposed to what had gone
before? Is there a point where you said, “Oh he’s a B-boy. This is new.”

FLASH: I think when actually dancers started making contact, like doing jump kicks and
kicking people on the floor, that’s when the hat started going like this [Flash turns his hat
sideways]. It was like, “I ain’t dancing with you, I’m gonna try to hurt you.” That’s when
the hat went to the side.

BAM: With some of them, they did hurt some. Some people got hurt. When they danced
against each other, or especially if they had different crews. All through the time there
was a struggle. You had your peaceful moments and you had your straight-up battles.

Herc: After a while guys would start to say, “Well you gonna have to pay to see me dance.”
Or, “If you want to take me out or discredit me you have to put some money up.”

THE SOURCE: Like Basketball. What were the records that made them do that?

ALL: James Brown, “Give It Up, Turn It Loose.”

BAM: “Apache” was the national anthem.

HERC: “Just Begun.”

FLASH: “Black Heat,” remember that one?

BAM: “Family ...” by Sly and the Family Stone.

THE SOURCE: To find these beats, you would go to Downstairs Records and just find a ton of
records?

ALL: No we didn’t just go to Downstairs!

FLASH: That was one of Herc’s spots.

HERC: That spot to me was where I find shit that wouldn’t be nowhere else, or I found some-
thing that I could say, “Hey this is good.” ’'d go to somebody’s house and they’d say, “Herc,
I know you like records, run through my records. I got a whole lot of stuff there.”

FLASH: Or girls’ houses for sure. Dope.

HERC: Or going to one of Bam’s parties and I hear something and I say, “I could use this with
this.”

--- Page 4 ---
48 « NELSON GEORGE

BAM: I took music from around the whole world. I was playin’ so much crazy shit, they called
me the master of records.

FLASH: He was the man. He was the king of the records.

HERC: When I go to his party, I’m guaranteed to be entertained by some shit I don’t hear other
people play. Then I step to Mr. Bam, “What’s that one?”

THE SOURCE: Tell me five records you might play in a row back in the day?

BAM: Well you would hear something from the Philippines by a group named Please which
did a remix for “Sing a Simple Song.”

FLASH: You might hear “Fernando” by Bob James, I might play that witha...

HERC: You might hear “Fat Sap from Africa” or “Seven Minutes of Funk.” “Babe Ruth.”

FLASH: Or how about on the back side of the Incredible Bongo Band, the other one,
“Bongolia.”

BAM: You could hear “The Return of Planet Rock” by the Incredible Bongo Band. “Sing, Sing,
Sing,” “Sex” by Bobby Knight.

THE SOURCE: Who was the first person to take the record in the bathtub and wipe the labels
off?

FLASH: That was me. People were getting too close, you know. I will give all due respect to my
boys right here, but you know, other people.

HERC: He put us on a wild goose chase [everyone laughs].

BAM: I had a way of telling things from the color of the album. I could know if it was Mercury
or Polygram. Then I would try to see who it sounded like.

FLASH: Hey Bam, I followed you on a Saturday with glasses on. I seen one bin you went to,
pulled the same shit you pulled, took that shit home—and the break wasn’t on the mutha-
fucka [everyone is hysterical].

BAM: [ used to tell people, “Do not follow me and buy what I buy,” and I went into a record store
and everyone was waitin’ around to see what I pulled. So I pulled some Hare Krishna
records [everyone laughs]. It had beats but...

FLASH: You couldn't play that bullshit. I got a crate full of bullshit.

HERC: If I go somewhere and I hear something, I give the DJ respect. I don’t try to say, “I
played it.” “Cause the first time I heard “Seven Minutes of Funk,” I was with this girl I used
to talk to, and we were at this place called The Point, and it was like a movie. The minute
we hit the door, people knew who we were, and we didn’t know people knew who we were.
All we heard was ... [Herc hums the “Seven Minutes of Funk” bassline which was used
on EPMD’s “It’s My Thing”] The further we walk in the party the record was still going.
I was like, “That shit is ruff.”

THE SOURCE: Who discovered “The Mexican”?

BAM: Herc got “The Mexican.”

THE SOURCE: What kind of equipment did you have in the late ’70s, early ’80s?

FLASH: I had six columns and maybe two bullshit bass bottoms. I didn’t have much of a
system. I was going to school and I had a messenger job. I also had electronic experience
though, so a lot of the stuff I make-shifted. I didn’t really hear a real heavy, heavy, heavy
system until I heard this man [Herc] out in the park. It was incredible.

THE SOURCE: Where did you get your equipment?

HERC: My old man bought a Sure P.A. system for his band he used to be with. The band fell
off and the speakers wound up in my room. My pops was a little strict and told me to not
touch ’em. I never did play ’em but another kid in the neighborhood had the same system
and played his. So I asked him how to hook up the Sure P.A. to the system. They wouldn't
tell me. So I borrowed one of my father’s friend’s systems cause I wouldn’t touch the Sure
stuff in the house. What they was doing was using one of the channels from the turnta-
bles and using the brain itself to power the whole thing. My shit was, I used the pre-amp,

--- Page 5 ---
HIP-HOP’S FOUNDING FATHERS SPEAK THE TRUTH e 49
used the speakers wires put into a channel, and used the two knobs to mix. I got more
sound than they ever got.

THE SOURCE: What kind of turntables were you using?

HERC: At first I started with Gerards [laughs]. Then from there I went downtown and I seen
two Technics 1100As and I went and got ’em.

FLASH: They’re still the best turntables in the world right now, the 1100A, but you can’t find
em. Because of the tork and the pick-up. You could have the hand the size of a monkey
and that thing would still turn. The actual design of that turntable was incredible. I was
never able to afford ’em so I had to adjust my touch to cheaper turntables.

THE SOURCE: But the questions is, who started it?

FLASH: There was this family called the Livingstons, OK. There was Gene, Claudio, and this little
kid named Theodore. Now, before we actually became Grandmaster Flash and the Furious
Five, I kept my equipment at Gene Livingston’s house. What he would tell me is because
his little brother was so interested was, “Don’t let Theodore in the room, don’t let
Theodore on the turntables!” Now when he went to work, I would tell Theodore to come
on in and let me see what you can do. Now, he had an ability to take the needle and drop
it and just keep it going. He had such a rhythm that was incredible. I begged Gene for like
a year and a half to take this little kid out in the park with us as the team to get larger
notoriety. He didn’t like the idea of it. After a while this little kid kinda outshined his big
brother. So what Theodore did for scratchin’ is this—where I had expertise on the back-
spin or fakin’ the faze, what Theodore would do with a scratch was make it more rhyth-
mical. He had a way of rhythmically taking a scratch and making that shit sound musical.
He just took it to another level.

THE SOURCE: People don’t appreciate how much technical knowledge went into the creation
of music. You had to really study turntables and speakers and the entire thing.

FLASH: Break-up plenty of equipment to get what it was.

THE SOURCE: So you had to custom-make everything.

FLASH: I had to custom-make my cue system also. I couldn’t afford a mixer with a built-in cue
system where you could hear turntable one or two in advance. I had to actually get a single
pole—double throw switch, crazy glue it to the top of my mixer, build an external mix on
the outside just strong enough to drive a headphone, so when you clicked it over you
would hear the other turntable in advance. But this whole idea of hearing the cut ahead
of time took three years to come into being.

THE SOURCE: How did you create the beat box?

FLASH: For some reason the world seems to think the beat box is something you do with your
mouth. The beat box was an attempt to come up with something other than the tech-
niques I created on the turntables to please the crowd. There was this drummer who lived
in the Jackson projects who had this manually operated drum box he used to practice his
fingering. I begged him to sell it to me. Then I found a way to wire it into my system and
called it the beat box. The drummer taught me how to use it. When my partner Disco Bee
would shut the music off, I would segue into it, so you couldn't tell where the music
stopped and I started.

THE SOURCE: Bam, where do you trace your interest in music to?

BAM: Il give credit to my mother. When I was growing up in the ’60s, I used to hear a lot of
the Motown sounds, James Brown sounds, the Stax sounds, Isaac Hayes and all of them.
As well as Edith Piaf, Barbra Streisand, the Beatles, the Who, Led Zeppelin. From there I
started knowing about a lot of different music and that’s when I first heard African music
from Miriam Makeeba. I was listening to this sister talk about things about South Africa
which I didn’t really understand at the time. One movie that grabbed my attention was this
movie called Zulu. At the time when you were seeing Black people on TV, you would see

--- Page 6 ---
50 ¢ NELSON GEORGE
us in degrading roles. So to see this movie with Black people fighting for their land was a
big inspiration for me. Then here comes this guy that I used to not like at first, I though
he was weird and crazy, which was Sly Stone. But once I heard “Sing a Simple Song,”
“People,” and “Stand,” I switched totally to this sound of funk. Then I seen the whole
Motown start changing. The Temptations started getting psychedelic. I was a gang
member by that time. From ’69 to about ’75 I was in the Black Spades but, like a lot of
these young great Black musicians, I was a visionary. I said to myself, “When I get older,
Tma have me a Zulu Nation.” I just waited for the right time.

THE SOURCE: You went from gangs to doing parties—how did you make that transition to
being a DJ?

BAM: Well before Flash, Herc, all of us, there was Disco DJs happening in the areas. Flowers,
Kool DJ Jones, Lovebug Starski, and Kool DJ Dee. Those were who I follow at one time.
Then you started hearing the sound that was coming from my brother Kool DJ Herc. Then
when I came out with my system, Herc was like an angel looking over me. Then when I
changed over to giving my big party, I didn’t have to worry about having it packed ’cause
I was in control of all the gangs out there anyway. So when I changed over and brought
everybody from the street gangs into the Zulu Nation, when I gave the first big function,
everyone knew who I was and backed me up.

THE SOURCE: People have always speculated that the rise of hip-hop caused the gangs to disap-
pear in New York or changed them over. What would you say the relationship was to the
rise of hip-hop parties to the gangs of New York?

BAM: Well, I would say the women were more important. The women got tired of the gang
shit. So brothers eventually started sliding slowly out of that cause they had people that
got killed. Cops were breakin’ down on people. The cops actually had a secret organiza-
tion called the “purple mothers” that were ex-Vietnam veterans that would roll on gang
members. There was a lot of crazy shit going on in the struggle of the gangs and the tran-
sition from the gangs dying down and the women putting their foot down. Drugs helped
destroy the gangs too. Now one thing people must know, that when we say Black we mean
all our Puerto Rican or Dominican brothers. Wherever the hip-hop was and the Blacks was,
the Latinos and the Puerto Ricans was, too.

THE SOURCE: What do you think now when people say that there’s a certain style of music
that’s considered hip-hop, and a certain style that’s not considered hip-hop? Claims that
some records are fake hip-hop records and some are real?

BAM: They’re ignorant. They don’t know the true forms of hip-hop. Just like I tell ’em, you
got all styles of hip-hop, you gotta take hip-hop for what it is. You got your hard beats, you
got your gangsta rap, you got your electro-funk sound which came from the party rock
sound, you got your Miami bass, you got the go-go from DC. We was playin’ go-go years
ago. If you really with Teddy Riley, he came to Bronx River parties and heard go-go music
and just flipped it up and now you got new jack swing. All of this was all part of hip-hop.

FLASH: It’s all about different tastes. It could be hard drums like a Billy Squire record. It could
be the bass hitting and drums soft like “Seven Minutes of Funk.” It could have the hallway
echo effect of “Apache.”

HERC: We can’t let the media define this for us. Someone says it’s got hardcore beats and talkin’
about bitches sucking dick, that’s hardcore. That same person says that Jazzy Jeff & the Fresh
Prince are soft, it’s not hip-hop. It is hip-hop. It’s just another form. It’s about experi-
menting and being open.

BAM: Different generations have lost the true meaning. We were teaching the public when we
did parties in the park.

THE SOURCE: Tell me about doing parties in the park.

--- Page 7 ---
HIP-HOP’S FOUNDING FATHERS SPEAK THE TRUTH « 51

HERC: See, the park playir’ is like playin’ for your people. You give them something free. Some-
times it’s hot and a lot of the clubs didn’t have no air conditioner. So I gave parties out in
the park to cool out while summer’s there. To play in the park is to give the fans and the
people something.

BAM: We’d play for everybody. Youd play certain records that grabbed the old, you played the
straight up hip-hop records...

FLASH: You can actually experiment ’cause now you have a wider audience coming. You have
like mothers and fathers and a wide spread of people. You can actually test your new-
found jams to see how they work on the public right then and there. You'll know right
then and there if you got something, as soon as you play it.

BAM: We were selling cassettes of our mixes that were really our first albums. We had luxury
cabs like OJ and the Godfathers and Touch of Class that would buy our tapes.

FLASH: How it worked was people would call for a car, and if they had a dope Herc tape, or a
dope Bam tape, or a dope Flash tape, that particular customer might stay in the cab all day
long. So these cab drivers were making extra money and at the same time they were adver-
tising us. Like Bam said, it was like cuttin’ an album, but it was on tape.

THE SOURCE: The first hip-hop I ever heard was on a tape that was sold in Brooklyn. I saw it
on Fulton Street, and that’s first time I realized it was being passed around the city.
BAM: Circulating. If you look at it, everything’s repeating itself now. Look at all the DJ tapes
now. You have Ron G, Kid Capri, Doo Wop. All these kids are doing the same things we
did twenty something years ago. It’s like life is returning back to the surface. Just like your

hearing a new rebirth of funk. All of the stuff is coming back, like Pumas...

FLASH: Bell bottoms, teardrops, the big high-heel shoes.

THE SOURCE: Talking about style, your two groups were both stylistically influenced by funk
groups.

BAM: I could tell you about that. A lot of the rappers used to dress regular and then we got
more into presenting people with something. You know, when you're payin’ five, ten
dollars to come in, you want to see people dressed up.

FLASH: You know what, we was like businessmen. In a very simplistic sort of fashion. It was like
three corporations and we carefully did things without realizing it.

BAM: We was businessmen at like thirteen, fourteen. Making our own parties. We had payrolls.
Picking the venues or the streets or the centers. Dealing with the politics, or deciding
whether you needed police. We dealt with so much business at such a young age.

THE SOURCE: One of the things you hear is that battling the essence of hip-hop. But you're
saying that that was something that came afterwards. At the root of it was some kind of
fellowship.

FLASH: Yeah. Experimental musically, but it was a fellowship.

THE SOURCE: Would guys roll up who were tryin’ to make a rep and challenge you one-on-
one?

FLASH: You can’t take away three or four years of establishment in one night. You can’t do that.
You'll just be a statistic. Bam, Herc and myself already had a science on how to control
our crowd. At that time you definitely had to earn it. Not in days, weeks, months— it took
years to get a little bit of respect. Then you had to pass through one of the three of us.

BAM: You couldn’t even come in our areas to play or else you dealt with us with respect. We
would make sure you couldn’t play one of the clubs or even come into the community.

THE SOURCE: I remember a club called 371. This was DJ Hollywood’s club. What did you guys
think about that whole scene?

BAM: Hollywood, himself, was more like disco oriented.

THE SOURCE: I’ve heard Hollywood was the first hip-hop rapper.

--- Page 8 ---
52 ¢ NELSON GEORGE

FLASH: No, the first people I heard talk on the microphone and do it extremely well and enter-
tain the crowd and wasn’t talkin’ to the beat of the music, was Herc’s people. Coke La
Rock. He would just talk while Herc was cuttin’.

HERC: Little phrases and words from the neighborhood that we used on the corner is what we
would use on the mic. Like we talkin’ to a friend of ours out there in the crowd.

BAM: And when they got rhymir it came from the Furious when they added Melle Mel.

FLASH: It was Cowboy, then it was Kid Creole, and Melle Mel. There were these dancers Debbi
and Terri who used to go through the crowds shouting “Ho!” and people picked up on
that. Cowboy came up with a lot of phrases and had a powerful voice that just
commanded attention. “Throw your hands in the air!” “Clap to the beat!” “Somebody
scream!” all came from Cowboy. Kid Creole and his brother Melle Mel were the first to really
flow and have a poetic feel to their rhymes. They were the first rhyme technicians. They
were the first to toss a sentence back and forth. Kid would say, “I,” Mel would say, “was,”
Kid would say, “walking,” Mel would say, “down.” They just tossed sentences like that all
day. It was incredible to watch, it was incredible to hear. Along with Coke La Rock with
Herc, they were the root. It was Cowboy, Kid Creole and Melle Mel for quite a while before
it became the five of us. Like syncopating to the beat of music was incredible. You just
didn’t get it overnight. You had to play with it, develop it, break things, make mistakes,
embarrass yourself. You had to earn it.

THE SOURCE: Is it a real important distinction between Hollywood and what you were doing?

FLASH: He did come in around the same era. He was there and made a mark. It was just he
was a softer side of music. Something we might not play, he would jam and kill it. He was
a disco rapper. He’d rap over things like “Love is the Message” which I would never play.
Things that were on the radio he’d do for the crowds at after-hours clubs.

THE SOURCE: For a lot of people, Disco Fever was the first place where they heard hip-hop.

ALL: No.

THE SOURCE: OK, then what was that place’s significance.

FLASH: There was a lot of clubs between Flash, Bam, and Herc. But the clubs started dimin-
ishing slowly but surely. Fatalities were happening there, there, and there. Things got a
little bad for everybody. This guy Sal at the Fever resisted at first, but then decided to take
a chance on it. What happened was the Fever became a later meeting point for a lot of
mobile jocks and new stars at the time. At any given time Camacho would walk in there,
Herc would walk in there, Kurtis Blow, Sugarhill Gang, a member of the Commodores. I
mean it was like this place was quite well known.

HERC: What the Fever did was give hip-hop a place with disco lights, fly, you could come nice.
It had a prime location next to the Concourse. It had a downtown atmosphere uptown.

THE SOURCE: When the Sugar Hill Gang made “Rapper’s Delight,” hip-hop was now on record.
You guys were the founders of this style, yet it was a while before you guys got involved
with making records. Did you discuss recording in the mid-’70s?

FLASH: I was approached in ’77. A gentleman walked up to me and said, “We can put what
you're doing on record.” I would have to admit that I was blind. I didn’t think that some-
body else would want to hear a record re-recorded onto another record with talking on it.
I didn’t think it would reach the masses like that. I didn’t see it. I knew of all the crews that
had any sort of juice and power, or that was drawing crowds. So here it is two years later,
and I hear “To the hip-hop, to the bang to the boogie,” and it’s not Bam, Herc, Breakout,
AJ. Who is this?

Herc: And when I heard [Big Bank] Hank [of the Sugar Hill Gang], I was like, what? I knew
Hank. I didn’t really appreciate that Hank knew me personally, had been to my house,
was from the neighborhood, and never once said, “Herc, I’m doing something.” Never,
until this day.

--- Page 9 ---
HIP-HOP’S FOUNDING FATHERS SPEAK THE TRUTH « 53

BAM: ’Cause he never gave credit to Grandmaster Casanova Fly, who is called Grandmaster
Caz these days from the Cold Crush Brothers, for the rhymes.

THE SOURCE: Now did he literally write them and Hank took them?

HERC: Caz used to come to the Sparkle where Hank was a doorman. He used to get on the
mic and Hank heard him. That’s when Hank saw the scene growing. I went to New
Jersey—my girlfriend knew him—and he was working in a pizza shop down there. I just
said, “When Sylvia [Robinson, of Sugar Hill Records] hear the real deal, she gonna know.”
And I was happy to be in the Fever when she seen the truth. And it was hell with them
after that. To see Melle Mel and them on stage.

FLASH: ’Cause the cream of the crop like Caz, The Fantastic Five was in there.

THE SOURCE: Again, you guys did eventually make records. You got with Bobby Robinson who
had Enjoy Records in Harlem for years.

FLASH: Yeah we got with Bobby. We was playir’ at a club on 125th street. All I know was he made
me very nervous ’cause I knew what my age bracket was, and here was this old man who
came in at about 11:00, and he stayed to the end of the party. So I said to myself, “Either
he’s the cops, he’s somebody’s father looking for his daughter, or something’s gonna go down
here.” So then when we were breaking down the equipment at the end of the night, he
stepped me and said, “Flash, do you think it’s possible that we can get together and
possibly put together a record.” You know, I went back to the folks, talked about it, and we
did it.

THE SOURCE: How much did he pay you?

FLASH: Maybe a thousand a man. Not bad.

THE SOURCE: Almost all the people who came at this point were still Black though, am I right?

BAM: Record companies, yeah they were still Black.

THE SOURCE: It was still a Black thing in the sense that to find out about it you had to be near
the grass roots.

FLASH: These were little record companies that were selling records out the trunk of their car.
They were only looking for cream of the crop rappers to do this. At that time, all they
wanted was what Sylvia was doing.

THE SOURCE: A lot is going on right now. We’re talking about ’80, ’81. We have the first rap
records. The music is starting to spread in terms of your appearances outside of the
Bronx. Did you get the sense that it was getting out of control?

FLASH: I wanted to push it.

HERC: I was mad when Sugar Hill came first and did their thing.

BAM: I was the one who was always more independent. I would just sit back and watch to see
where things were going before I stepped into it. "Cause I was watching Flash be successful
moving his stuff, I was happy. Then this white guy came down and checked us out named
Malcolm MacLaren. And Tom Silverman came down and checked me out in Bronx River
with Arthur Baker. First Malcolm MacLaren came, ’cause he said, “There’s this Black kid
playir’ all this rock and other type of music to a Black and Spanish audience.” When he
seen this, he invited me to come play at the Ritz with Bow Wow Wow. So when I came
and did that show, I brought everybody together like Rock Steady and all the groups.
That’s where I first met them and we all came under the Zulu Nation. There was this guy
Michael Holman who used to invite me down to DJ at the Mudd Club, then to Negril
with my son Afrika Islam, D.St., Whiz Kid.

Then we used to get too big for that so we went to Danceteria and got too big for that
until finally the Roxy became our home. Then Flash and them came and played the Ritz
on the Sugar Hill tour with Sequence and the West Street Mob. With the Roxy it became
like an international world club. Everyone was coming to the Roxy. Then you had the
clubs that didn’t want hip-hop nowhere down there like the Limelight. They would make

--- Page 10 ---
54 ¢ NELSON GEORGE
a dress code ’cause there were too many Blacks and Puerto Ricans coming into the neigh-
borhood. That’s when I started fighting racism down in the club scene. I would say, “If
you don’t let my Blacks or Puerto Ricans in, ’m gonna leave.” That’s when we started
gettin’ power in the clubs.

THE SOURCE: How did you feel about the whole process of going from having parties to doing
records?

FLASH: I’d have to say, I wasn’t ready. I was content with what I was doing. I think what
happened was when Herc stopped playing eight hours a night. Flash stopped playing, Bam
stopped playing, the street thing flipped. Like one DJ would play eight different clubs in
one night and not really have an audience anymore. You lost your home champion
because there was nobody there. I would have personally like to stay away from records a
little longer. Not to say that I wouldn’t want to make records ’cause records was the next
plateau for spreading the musical word.

BAM: Everyone was nervous. It took the excitement away. We didn’t have the parties. Everyone
would go out and buy the record.

FLASH: It was a thing to me coming into the place at six and taking two-and-a-half hours to
set up the sound system and make sure the EQs were right and the crates were right. It was
fun.

BAM: Plus a lot of people in the early records were gettin’ robbed. That’s something a lot of people
don’t want to talk about it. A lot of people now who know they can make money have to
know what the Old School went through.

FLASH: You know what’s really sad to know and see, is that these people have never really seen
a block party—like a block party that goes ten or twelve hours. Starting at noon and
ending at midnight. I mean you have to really be in a party for hours to watch a DJ expand
on what he would play. That would separate the men from the boys as far as the DJ is
concerned. The way I see it, the less times he repeats something in a ten hour period, the
more qualified he is. That’s why we would come up with ten-fifteen crates of records. So
we wouldn't have to play anything twice.

THE SOURCE: You all seem to feel there’s a sense of community about the hip-hop scene during
the party era that’s never really been recaptured.

BAM: Today it gets sickening with the disrespecting of self. To me a lot of brothers and sisters
lost knowledge of self. They’re losing respect of the “us syndrome” and getting into the “I
syndrome.” You can’t build a nation with an “I” you got to build a nation with a “us.” The
disrespecting of the Black women—you got some sisters that go into the category
“bitches,” although you got a lot of the Black women that don’t deserve that.

THE SOURCE: I want to get into the whole area of the media and rap’s evolution. How do you
feel the history rap has been told? Do you think it has been distorted in any way?

FLASH: There are those out there that made a great attempt to accuracy. Then there are those
who are just doing it to make a dollar. I think to this point it hasn’t been really told. I’m
not going to try to toot my own horn, but I think the only ones that can really tell you
the story are Herc, Bam, Breakout and myself. Either you can hear his-story or history,
and the only way you gonna hear the real historical views on it is by the people who were
actually there—who actually took it from nothing and built into whatever it became to
be. Some people don’t dig deep enough to find out what happened back then. They just
fix it so it’s comfortable for the reader, which is really dangerous.

BAM: My thing from studying history and listening to great leaders like Elijah, Malcolm, and
Minister Farrakhan, I see that everything is planned by design. Even in the industry,
nobody talked to the Black and Latino and said, “Do y’all want to get rid of vinyl?” They
never had no survey. But the next thing you know vinyl is out the door and CDs are in. I
always told people that there was people in the industry that was tryin’ to destroy hip-

--- Page 11 ---
HIP-HOP’S FOUNDING FATHERS SPEAK THE TRUTH 55
hop. They couldn’t do it. That’s why Zulu Nation, TC Islam and all of us are pushing a united
hip-hop front. Cause you got a lot of people from the Old School who are really mad.
Melle Mel, Kurtis Blow, Kevi Kev, a lot of old timers who didn’t get their due respect or
even the money that they should have made. You got people who are opening the door that
are out of there now who ain't paying no mind where the history come from.

THE SOURCE: When you say Old School guys are mad, who owes them? Where did the point
come where they were left behind?

BAM: A lot of the companies, a lot of friction happened between the companies. You had
companies that was robbing people by not telling them about publishing. Some artists’
albums went gold but they didn’t give them no money. You know, here’s a leased car
instead of royalties.

THE SOURCE: Well let me ask you something—who owns hip-hop now?

BAM: White industry.

HERC: Whites.

BAM: The white industry owns it now because they control all the record companies. And all
our people that make money worry about Benz’s and big houses and fly girls instead of
being Black entrepreneurs. You need to take the business back.

THE SOURCE: Herc, you're one of the people that there’s a great mystique or mystery about. Tell
us about the decisions you made during the period when rap came out on records.

HERC: I was maintained as far as running the sound system and giving parties. The mic was
always open for the MCs. My thing was just playin’ music and giving parties. I wasn’t
interested in making no records.

THE SOURCE: What do you most like about hip-hop culture today?

FLASH: Contrary to the media and to the powers that be, hip-hop has a vibe. Under all the
crush and blows, being called a fad, it now has its own category and is stronger than ever.
I thank God that I’m here to see it. It’s quite a compliment to walk down the street and
be told, “Flash do you realize you're a legend?” But a lot of times legends die young and
don’t get to see what they seeded. I’m glad to see it.

THE SOURCE: What about hip-hop culture at this point do you dislike the most?

FLASH: I think that somebody went around and said that in order to cut a hit record, we have
to disrespect our brothers, sisters, mothers and children. What people don’t realize here
is that hip-hop has a large influence on people. What you say maybe just frivolously,
somebody can seriously go out and go do. I’m not sayin’ that what we’re doing is not right,
but it shouldn't be the only way that a record is made. Like if you listen to ten records, seven
of them is either disrespecting our sisters, or hurting people.

THE SOURCE: Bam, what do you like most about what’s going on now?

BAM: I love that hip-hop has become international. I love when I go to France and hear French
hip-hop groups. I love when I go to England and hear British hip-hop groups. I love to see
hip-hop groups all through Africa. Hip-hop has taken a lot of brothers and sisters who might
be doing negative things and have gotten into the rap world to see other people’s way of
life. Hip-hop has also had a force to unite people together. You have all people of color trying
to understand what’s happening with the Black problem. Some are getting educated about
negative and positive things.

Nelson: Herc, what aspect of hip-hop culture do you like the most?

HERC: That it’s still here. It’s giving youth a chance to pay for education if they want to. Giving
em a chance to go overseas. It’s here, it ain't going nowhere. Music was always our way of
information—it was the drums. They took it away from us in Africa, now we found it
again. The music is our fuckin’ drums man. All I could say right now as far as rappers out
here today is: be true to the game.
