--- Page 1 ---
ae 2 Routledge
2 Taylor & Francis Group
Popular Music & Society
i ele urea
Ss
EB ISSN: 0300-7766 (Print) 1740-1712 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rpms20

Orality and technology: Rap music and
Afro-American cultural resistance
Tricia Rose
To cite this article: Tricia Rose (1989) Orality and technology: Rap music and Afro-American
cultural resistance, Popular Music & Society, 13:4, 35-44, DOI: 10.1080/03007768908591371
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/03007768908591371

oo Published online: 24 Jul 2008.

NJ
(sg Submit your article to this journal @
lili Article views: 1564
a
ey View related articles 4
wr Citing articles: 4 View citing articles @
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=rpms20

--- Page 2 ---
Orality and Technology: .
Rap Music and Afro-American .
Cultural Resistance
Tricia Rose

Rap music has a complex mass-mediated image. Television and radio
attention to rap music has focused on the violence associated with its
concerts, its potential as a consumer marketing tool and its co-optation
as a vehicle for conveying social messages to poor urban black youth.
Fast food, athletic wear, cars, clothing and even food storage
advertisements (the Reynolds (w) rap campaign) have used rap music
and Hip Hop aesthetics to sell commodities. New York City’s Mayor
Koch has sponsored several anti-drug campaigns with famous rap artists
as stars: the “Crack is Wack” campaign, featuring Grand Master Flash
and the Furious Five; “‘Don’t do Drugs” starring Kurtis Blow and RUN
D.M.C.’s nation-wide campaign to ‘get kids to stay in school’.

In the written media, a handful of commercial, glossy rap and Hip
Hop books have been published. Their intent has been to give a short
history of rap and show photos of its heroes and stars. The Village Voice
has been the primary media mouthpiece for Hip Hop, but for a number
of reasons, its format and audience among them, the Voice has attended
to Hip Hop as one of many avant-garde youth cultures that it packages
for the progressive bourgeois left. Short, irregular but interesting articles.
on Hip Hop in the Voice are the most informative media interpretations
to be found.

While these introductions to rap music and Hip Hop acknowledge
that the form has musical integrity and that rappers speak to an
identifiable audience, the music itself, its relationship to Afro-American
culture, and the power struggles over meaning and culture that rap music ;
articulates has not been the central focus of any scholarly work to date.
It is in this absence that my paper will attempt to lay some ground
work.!

My project is not to set up a relationship between the mass media
and rap music and analyze the degree of co-optation and nature of
hegemonic influence to which rap has been subjected by larger dominant
cultural apparatuses. That is a larger project, one which is intimately

35 ;

--- Page 3 ---
III
36 Popular Music and Society
bound to this paper. Instead, I would like to focus on the historical
context that contributes to rap’s development, the particular hybrid of

orality and technology imbedded in its form, and its resistive force in
popular culture and mass media.
I: Historicizing Hip Hop

. Rap music is a dynamic strain in Afro-American music created in
the 1970s by poor black youth in the South Bronx in New York City.
While the South Bronx is unanimously considered the home of rap music
(and Hip Hop in general), it is more widely perceived as the desolate
land of burned-out, vandalized, condemned and abandoned buildings

with poor black and Hispanic families living among the ruins.”

Rap music is, in part, an outgrowth of the social and political
conditions to which people of color in the Bronx were subjected. Those
conditions were an “unexpected side effect’? of a larger politically
motivated urban “renewal’’ project. The process of ethnic transition in
the South Bronx was not an evolutionary process that might have allowed
social and cultural institutions to respond self-protectively. Ethnic
transition in the South Bronx was a brutal process of community
destruction and relocation.

In the 1950s, the Bronx was the embodiment of the American Dream
for second generation immigrants from the impoverished lower east side
of Manhattan. The densely populated stable neighborhoods of the Bronx,
comprising mostly working and lower-middle class Jews, also contained

solid Italian, German, Irish and Black communities.

In 1959, Robert Moses (New York’s ‘grand visionary’) began
construction on an expressway that cut directly through the heart of
the Bronx. Some 60,000 Bronxites homes were razed. Neighborhoods were
destroyed.? Marshall Berman, in All That Is Solid Melts Into Air, reflects
on the massive disruption Moses’ project created:

Miles of streets alongside the road were choked with dust and fumes and deafening
noise...Apartment houses that had been settled and stable for over twenty years emptied
out, often virtually overnight; large and impoverished black and Hispanic families, fleeing
even worse slums, were moved wholesale, often under the auspices of the Welfare
Department, which even paid inflated rents, spreading panic and accelerating flight... Thus
depopulated, economically depleted, emotionally shattered-the Bronx was ripe for all the
dreaded spirals of urban blight.*

The vacancy rates in the southern section of the Bronx, where demolition
was most devastating, skyrocketed. Nervous landlords sold their property
as quickly as possible, often to professional slumlords, which accelerated
the flight of white tenants into northern sections of the Bronx and into
Westchester. Shopkeepers were equally anxious. The city administration,
considering Moses’ expressway to be a sign of progress and modernization,

--- Page 4 ---
Rap Music and Afro-American Cultural Resistance 37
was unwilling to admit the desecration that had occurred. The South
| Bronx, left with few city resources, was left to rot.
| The new ethnic groups who made the South Bronx their home in
the 1970s, while facing isolation and economic fragility, began building
their own cultural networks. It is the complex ethnic interaction that
developed in the Bronx combined with the post-1960s disillusionment
| and alienation that provided many of the cultural ingredients in Hip
Hop, the larger subculture of which rap is the most prominent facet.
Blacks from the Caribbean as well as North American blacks, contributed .
significantly to the development of a new cultural identity whose roots
in other post-colonial contexts were reformulated in a _ hostile,
technologically sophisticated, multi-ethnic, urban terrain.. Hip Hop
developed as part of a collective voice for those who had been condemned
to silence.
Crime, drugs, unemployment and unyielding frustration are
elemental to the lives of many Afro-Americans and are reflected in the
content of rap music. The tension between rap’s confining rhythmic
patterns and its aggressive presentation potentially assaults the white
middle-class listener. The end of the song brings relief for those who
fear the consequences of rap’s implicit demands; for those who long
for such disruptions, the song resembles an anthem. Rap constitutes
a form of resistance and self-identification for young working-class black
communities who are completely marginalized, and until the explosion
of Hip Hop have been largely spoken for by dominant culture.
II: Hip Hop Technology and Form
David Toop, one of rap’s early historiographers, argues that rap
is rooted in 20th-century Afro-American music:
Raps forebears stretch back through disco, street funk, radio DJs, Bo Didley, the bebop ,
singers, Cab Calloway, Pigmeat Markham, the tap dancers and comics, The Last Poets,
Gil Scott-Heron, Muhammad Ali, a capella and doo wop groups, ring games, skip rope
rhymes, prison and army songs, toasts, signifying and the dozens...No matter how far ,
it penetrates (my italics) into the twilight maze of Japanese video games and cool European
electronics, its roots are still the deepest in all contemporary Afro-American music.’
Toop, while having a clear grasp of the more prominent Afro-American
_ cultural influences in rap, draws a false dichotomy between rap’s Afro-
American roots and the post-modern electronic technology to which it
is equally wedded. Rap is not only the human voice and its traditional
instrumental accompaniments; it also represents the human voice re-
, constructed among drum machines, sequencers, and samplers. Rap, in
form and content, is highly technological and relies on the reformulation ,
of recorded sound in conjunction with oral rhymes to create its texture.
|
BR  ——

--- Page 5 ---
III I Liye
38 Popular Music and Society . |
; The rap voice as representation is altered and highly informed by the
technology that produces it.
Rap, then, is not simply a logical extension of other orally-based
Afro-American traditions with beat boxes and cool European electronics }
added on. Rap is a complex fusion of folk orality and post-modern
technology. This fusion between orality and technology is essential to
understanding the logic of rap music; a logic that while not purely oral,
maintains many characteristics of orally-based expression while at the |
same time incorporating and destablizing many characteristics of the
literate and highly technological society in which its practitioners live.
In a recent Village Voice article on Hip Hop technology, Harry
Allen captures the relationship between orality and technology in rap:
“Hip Hop humanized technology and makes it tactile. In Hip Hop,
you make the technology do stuff that it isn’t supposed to do, get music |
out of something that’s not supposed to give you music quite that way.’”6
Allen’s understanding of rap’s techno-logic and its challenge to the
institutional apparatuses that define technological innovation and .
authorship is an important step toward understanding the specificity .
of rap as a cultural form. I will focus on the ways in which rap lyrics
alter yet sustain important aspects of Afro-American folk orality, and
the manner in which the technology itself is made oral.
Rap is an expression of what Walter Ong has referred to as “‘post-
-literate orality.” In Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the
Word, Ong suggests that the electronic age is “an age of ‘secondary orality’,
the orality of telephones, radio, and television, which depends on writing |
and print for its existence.”? While his book focuses primarily on the |
differences in mentality between oral and writing cultures, his
conceptualization of a secondary orality (or as he later refers to it, “a ~
post-literate orality”’), is an innovative analytical tool for understanding
contemporary developments in Afro-American culture. The concept of
post-literate orality merges orally-influenced traditions that are created
and imbedded in a post-literate, technologically sophisticated cultural
context. So, Hip Hop “humanizes”’ technology and technologizes orality
simultaneously. |
In oral cultures, authorship is not essential to the performance of
stories. According to Ong, ‘narrative originality lodges not in making
up new stories, but in managing a particular interaction with this
audience at this time—at every telling the story has to be introduced
uniquely into a unique situation...formulas and themes are reshuffled
rather than supplanted with new materials.’’® For example, the famous
Afro-American oral tale of the Signifying Monkey has dozens of versions
and no individual author.? |
| |
|

--- Page 6 ---
Rap Music and Afro-American Cultural Resistance 39
Rappers have redefined this concept of communal authorship. :
Narrative originality zs lodged in creating new stories, and these stories
- are associated with the rapper. However, rapper’s rhymes are clearly
influenced by if not a direct outgrowth of the Afro-American toast
tradition. The dozen playing bravado of toasts like the Signifying Monkey
is brilliantly captured in Kool Moe Dee’s ““How Ya Like Me Now”.?°
Further, in keeping with oral forms, unique introduction of materials
takes on greater significance in the live performance.
On the whole, rappers carefully prepare and recite rhymes that
become permanently associated with its author. References to the rapper
and his/her DJ are extremely common. In a recent rap by Salt and Pepa
“Everybody Get Up” Salt says:
’ Spindarella, my D.J., is a turntable trooper
My partner Pepa, she’s a power booster.
Word to life, I swear, she’ll seduce ya
Don’t take my word I’ll introduce her."
In Eric B. and Rakim’s ‘‘Follow the Leader’, the chorus—‘“‘follow the
leader Rakim a say’’—is recited in rhythmic repetition to reinforce the
identity of the performer.’? Examples of naming are endless. My point
is that rap fuses literate concepts of authorship with orally-based
constructions of thought and expression.
The content is sometimes so specific to its creator that to “steal
a rhyme” requires that references to its creator be rewritten. The
- significance of naming in rap is exemplified by a recent revision of L.L.
Cool J.’s 1986 hit “I’m Bad.’’8 In it, L. L. brags that he is “bigger
and better, forget about deffer’’ and at a climax point instructs his fans
to “forget Oreos eat Cool J. cookies.” A famous Go-Go band from .
' Washington D. C. performed a Go-Go version of “I’m Bad” in a live
concert. At the same point in the rhyme, to the delight of the audience,
the lead singer Chuck Brown announced “forget Oreos eat Chuck Brown
cookies.’ For another rapper to eat Cool J. cookies would be the ultimate
defeat, but Chuck Brown is a Go-Go artist, not a rap artist. Differences
in sound and image are territorial necessities for competing contemporary
Afro-American urban subcultures. Thus, the Go-Go audience perceived
Chuck Brown’s theft of L. L. Cool J’s rhyme as Go-Go's victory over
rap. Brown’s editorial revision does not erase L. L. Cool J. as author.
The absence of L. L. Cool J.’s name does not silence his presence, but
displaces him and Hip Hop. The story told in “I’m Bad” is L. L. Cool
J.’s story and a Hip Hop story. Without L. L.’s presence, and his identity
as a rap artist, the theft of the rhymes has little significance. In this
context the replacement of L. L. Cool J’s name is necessary to the symbolic
victory of Go-Go over rap.
Poo

--- Page 7 ---
40 Popular Music and Society .
- While power is located in the oral presentation of rap, rap rhymes
are not “fixed, rhythmically balanced expressions” like those Ong refers
to in his description of oral cultures, but rhymes constructed in linear,
literate (written) patterns. They are rhymes, written down first, memorized
and recited orally. In oral cultures, there is no written context to aid
in memorization. As Ong notes: “In an oral culture, to think through
something in non-formulaic, non-patterned, non-mnemonic terms, even
_ if it were possible, would be a waste of time, for such thought, once
worked through, could never be recovered with any effectiveness, as it
could be with the aid of writing.” 14 By comparison, rap’s improvisational
oral performances display written (literate) forms of thought and
communication. .
Informed by and dependent on literate forms of communication and
reproduction for their complexity, rappers and their rhymes are a far
cry from traditional oral poetic forms and performers. For example, in
rap the rhymed word is often in the middle of a long sentence, and
punctuated short phrases are worked against the meter of the bass line.
The ability to easily reconstruct the rhyme and the music allows for
greater flexibility in the construction and performance of rhymed lyrics.
Simply to recite or to read the lyrics to a rap song is not to understand
them; they are also inflected with the syncopated rhythms and sampled
sounds of the music. The music, its rhythmic patterns and the
idiosyncratic articulation by the rapper are essential to the meaning of
the song.
The Hip Hop DJ has a different relationship to the concept of .
authorship and narrative originality. Rap Disc Jockeys’ instruments are
the electronic samplers that re-produce synthesized versions of traditional
instruments, frighteningly real reproductions of other sounds (breaking
glass, sirens, etc.), and the dynamic and explosive mixing and dubbing
of previously recorded and seemingly fixed sound. These samples are
dubbed from other rhythm sections, other clearly and intentionally
. recognizable bass lines and horn sections, and reformulated in
conjunction with beat box sounds and the rappers style and accentuation.
, Sampling is a process of recontextualization, not repetition or
mimicry. Sample machines are musical de-and re-construction devises.
Harry Allen explains:
Record the sound of these pages turning as your TV plays the “One Life to Live” theme
in the background. Or record your boss yelling. Or a piece of Kool and the Gang, whatever,
for up to 63 seconds. Loop it, so it plays end-on-end forever, or hook the S900 (sampler)
up to a keyboard and play whatever you recorded in a scale.'5 :
To ‘sample’ is to transform a series of independent sounds or a previously
fixed configuration of rhythms or sounds, and recode them. In this way,
sampling is strikingly similar to Ong’s interpretation of narrative
|
_ i a — _ |

--- Page 8 ---
Rap Music and Afro-American Cultural Resistance 41
originality in oral cultures: ‘narrative originality lodges not in making
up new stories...[instead] formulas and themes are reshuffled rather
than supplanted with new materials.’’!§ Hip Hop DJs reshuffle known
cultural formulas and themes. It is in this context that narrative originality
is lodged. In the age of mechanical reproduction, these cultural formulas
and themes are in the form of recorded sound. Hip Hop humanizes
technology and technologizes orality.
These samples are not random or chaotic. For example, the Hip
Hop community knows that Eric B. and Rakim took the bass line for
their cut “Paid in Full’ from Dennis Edwards’ ‘Don’t Look Any Further’’
a popular R & B song that topped the charts only a year earlier. Hip
Hop fans know that Kid N Play, MC Lyte and Kool Moe Dee resurrect
guitar and bass lines from James Brown and other soul precursors. In
fact, more often than not, rap artists and their DJs openly revere their ,
soul forbearers. Stetsasonic in ‘Talkin’ All that Jazz’ from their latest
album, In Full Gear, charge:
You erase our music
So no one could use it...
Tell the truth—James Brown was old
Til Eric B came out with ‘I Got Soul’.
Rap brings back old R & B
If we would not
People could have forgot.!”
Sampling has important resistive and manipulative effects in the
recording industry. Mass cultural apparatuses consider sampling a form ,
' of theft. To take portions of copyrighted material and re-use it without
‘permission’ undermines legal and capital market authority. However,
the profit imperative makes policing such theft undesirable for record ,
executives. These samples are re-recorded and they Sell records. For a
recording label to win a law suit in order to take a share of another
label’s profit would raise the possibility that similar profits will have
to be paid (in full) in another case. When Kool Moe Dee’s explosive
“How Ya Like Me Now” opens with “All aboard. The Night Train!”
sampled from a James Brown record, it not only verifies Brown as the
author, it paradoxically undermines any fixed link his sound has to
the label on which it was “originally” recorded. Brown’s exclamation
in the context of Kool Moe Dee’s piece is employed as a communal
resource in opposition to the recording industry. In the opening moment ,
of ‘How Ya Like Me Now” James Brown is affirmed and valorized,
Kool Moe Dee is situated within an Afro-American music tradition, and
a self-constructed resistive history is sounded.

--- Page 9 ---
42 Popular Music and Society
The literate and the musical texts in rap are a dynamic hybrid of
oral and advanced technological forms. Rap lyrics, fundamentally linked
to the rappers, clearly indicates the importance of authorship and
, individuality. There are shared phrases and slang words in rap lyrics, ,
but a given rap text is the voice of the rapper.!8 The music is a complex
; cultural reformulation of a community’s knowledge and memory of itself.
; Rap lyrics and the sampled sounds that accompany them are highly
literate and technological and yet articulate a distinct oral past.
Sampling is not the only method of cultural reformulation and
resistance. Mixes of the old and the new, (“‘versioning”’ as it is referred
to by Dick Hebdige in his new book Cut ’N’ Mix,) is at the heart of
all Afro-American and Carribean musics: “The original version takes
on a new life and a new meaning in a fresh context.’!® Versioning,
(unlike sampling), entails the reworking of an entire composition. While
I concur with Hebdige’s overall analysis, I would like to dub in a different
version of his quote. The referenced version takes on alternative lives
and alternative meanings in a fresh context. Versioning, too, redefines
the traditional concept of authorship and originality as it incorporates
it.
Conceptual analyses of rap should not overshadow interpretations
of the music in its specificity. Eric B. and Rakim’s “Paid in Full” is
, the title rap from their first record.?° The song opens with a drum rhythm
section and a-dialogue between Eric B. and Rakim that places them
in a particular recording and production camp. Then, while the music
opens with the bass line from Dennis Edward’s ‘Don’t Look and Further,”’
Rakim, the rapper tells the story of life on the edge and constantly returns
to money, the means of survival. The constant cutting and mixing of
the music keeps the listener in a perpetual state of anticipation. The
walking bassline and the flute riff give the illusion of a lyric and
purposeful gait. Rakim’s deep and ominous voice combined with the .
sarcastic references to life on the edge of respectability keep the listener
; on edge. A second conversation between Eric B. and Rakim bring the
, listener back to the confines of the studio and, in what seem to be an
afterthought, Eric B. asks, ‘‘what happened to peace?’”’ Good question.
The piece closes with peace echoed in the mix.
In this rap, the studio and the rehearsed monitored production (or
absence of improvisation) associated with it are de-emphasized by Eric
. B. and Rakim. They seem to have just walked in off the street and started
rolling the tapes. After Rakim’s rhyme, they get ready to leave the studio.
Rakim suggests that they, “pump up the music and count [their] money.”
Eric B. then tells Ely, the engineer: ‘Yo, but check this out, yo Ely!
Turn the bass down, and just let the beat keep rockin’.’”’ Eric B. and
Rakim sign off with ‘Peace’ right before a long and complex scratch
and sample solo by Eric B.. Surely Eric B. is not counting his money

--- Page 10 ---
Rap Music and Afro-American Cultural Resistance 43
while Ely mixes this solo, but the illusion of effortlessness further proves
his/their expertise and mastery over technology.
This rap’s acknowledgment of the presence of the recording studio
juxtaposed against Rakim’s rhyme about life on the street without money,
demystifies technology and its production. Simultaneously, the power
of technology (the recording industry) is posited as the reason for their
material success. Eric B. and Rakim suggest that they can manipulate ,
what technology produces—including its on-site manager, Ely, the
engineer. Needless to say, actual artistic control over recording production
is quite circumscribed for musicians. Instead, Eric B. and Rakim’s
manipulation of Ely is to be understood as symbolic control over the
process of technological reproduction. Their overt concern with profit
and commodity production discloses the primary agenda of the recording
industry. Eric B. and Rakim implicitly contradict the myth of artistic
freedom yet seem to ‘perform’ creatively. They resist the masked and
naturalized dominance of the institutional apparatus by overtly
expressing its presence and logic.
It is clear that rap music is a technologically sophisticated and
complex urban sound. No doubt, its forbearers stretch far into the orally-
influenced traditions of Afro-American culture. But the oral aspects of
. rap are not to be understood as primary to the logic of rap. Rap is
fundamentally literate and deeply technological. To interpret rap as a
natural outgrowth of oral Afro-American forms is to romanticize and
decontextualize rap as a form. The class and racial alienation that
undergirds Afro-American urban working class life in the 1980s is
_ constructed within life at the bottom of a highly technological late capital
society. Rap is a statement of class-conscious self-expression, a post- .
modern, technologically sophisticated project in Afro-American
recuperation. If nothing else, Afro-American music and culture,
inextricably tied to concrete historical developments, has found yet
another way to unnerve and simultaneously revitalize American culture.
Rap music is viewed by mainstream American culture as a
threatening, unbridled expression of poor inner-city black teenagers. As
Greg Tate warns, “hip hop might be bought and sold like gold, but
the miners of its rich ore still represent a sleeping-giant constituency.’’2!
The miners are the rappers. They are the cultivators of a communal
artifact—refining and developing the framework of an alternative identity
that is at times unintelligible to those outside of it. The power of
unanticipated and unintelligible group action, the sleeping giant to
which Tate refers, is where the potential mobilizing force of rap lies.
The rhymes and samples need not be (and in many cases are not) overtly ;
political or socially conscious.?? In form alone, they concretize the
conditions that shape the lives of the Hip Hop community, while creating
a communal history; for the most part, a self-produced communal history.
nn

--- Page 11 ---
44 Popular Music and Society
‘Notes
1One notable exception to this absence is Paul Gilroy’s There Ain’t No Black
in the Union Jack (Hutchinson Press, 1988). He offers an exciting and solid
comparative analysis of the links between contemporary afro-musics in Britain, the
U.S. and the Caribbean. See Chapter 5 for a discussion on Hip Hop and rap music.
?Hager, Steve. Hip Hop: The Illustrated History of Breakdancing, Rap Music
and Graffiti. (New York, 1984) pgs. 1-30.
3Berman, Marshall. All That is Solid Melts into Air. (New York, 1982) pgs.,
290-292.
4Berman, pg. 292.
5Toop, David. The Rap Attack: African Jive to New York Hip Hop (London,
1984) pg. 19.
®Allen, Harry. “Invisible Band’. Village Voice October 18, 1988. pg. 10 in the
Eletromag section.
7Ong, Walter. Orality and Technology: The Technologizing of the Word.
, (Methuen, 1982) pg. 3.
8Ong, pg. 42.
9See Bruce Jackson, Get Your Ass in the Water and Swim Like Me (Cambridge,
1974) for transcriptions of Signifying Monkey and other Afro-American oral folktales.
10Jive Records, 1987. (RCA).
From Salt with a Deadly Pepa. Salt n Pepa, Next Plateau Records, 1988.
12Fyom Follow The Leader, Eric B. and Rakim, UNI Records, 1988. (MCA). :
From Bad, L. L. Cool J., Def Jam Records, 1987. (CBS).
M4Op. Cit. Ong., pg. 35.
45Op. Cit., Allen.
1’Op. Cit., Ong. pg. 42.
"From In Full Gear Stetsasonic, Tommy Boy Records, 1988.
18See Spin Magazine (October 1988), for Hip Hop slang dictionary.
'Hebdige, Dick. Cut n Mix: Culture, Identity and Caribbean Music. (Methuen,
1987). pg. 14.
20From, Paid in Full, Eric B. and Rakim. Island Records, 1986.
21Tate, Greg. ‘It’s Like This Y’all” in Hip Hop Nation, Village Voice, January
19, 1988. pg. 22.
22Male rappers’ references to women can generally (but not without exception)
be considered typically patriarchial, and in their worst examples, down-right
misogynist. This is not to say that all rap lyrics by men about women should be
‘condemned’ or considered lacking in social consciousness’. There are complex gender
‘ interactions and representations in rap lyrics; some of the representations are politically
expressive and others are socially conscious. However, such gendered analyses will
have to be the subject of another paper.
Tricia Rose is a Ph.D. candidate at Brown University in American Civilization. Currently,
she is living in New York City and working on her dissertation, entitled: ““Rap Music
: and Resistance: African-American Cultural Theory and Practice.”’
