--- Page 1 ---
\
|
\
i
i
INTRODUCTION:
LOST, STOLEN, OR STRAYED? :
One of the most honored television documentaries of the late 1960s was a CBS News
Tour written by Andy Rooney and Perry Wolff called “Black History: Lost, Stolen,
or Strayed?” That title kept coming back to me during the years in which this book
was being researched. African Americans made significant contributions to the re-
cording industry in its formative years, from 1890 to 1919, and their recordings re-
veal much about evolving African American culture during that period. Yet little of
that aural history is now available, and less has been written about it. Is this another
piece of black history that is lost, stolen, or strayed?
The stories of the first black recording artists turned out to be fascinating on
several levels. It would be easy to write a book about the injustices done to African
Americans over the course of the nation’s history. From the cold shackles of slav-
ery to the more subtle discrimination of modern times, America’s attitude toward
its black citizens has always been a stain on the national character and a source of
embarrassment. The examples are many and obvious. As tempting as it might be to
focus solely on the racial injustices of early twentieth-century America, it is argu-
ably more productive—and helpful to our own time—to examine the ways in which
those injustices were gradually ameliorated. How did change come about?
The stories of the first black recording artists are stories not only of barriers, but
of how some of those barriers were reduced. Progress—slow and halting, to be sure—
was won not so much by changes in the law, or by dramatic confrontations between
“good” and “evil,” as by the actions of ordinary people who when faced with in-
stances of unfairness quietly and without fanfare “did the right thing.” Through
their actions they acknowledged that the “color line” was fundamentally wrong. We
still have a considerable distance to travel in ensuring equal rights for all. The les-
sons of those times can help guide us today.
One agent of change that has been little recognized was the early recording in-
dustry.
The First Modern Mass Medium
Before television, before radio, before even motion pictures, an earlier mass medium
began paving the way for the shared social experience that has so profoundly

--- Page 2 ---
r
- 4. se< modern society. It startled and amazed the citizens of the late nineteenth i
century. Who could ever have imagined an entertainer, orator, or famous person F
being “bottled up,” only to spring to life, as if by magic, simultaneously in hundreds a
of remote locations? Nothing in five thousand years of human history anticipated a
such a possibility. And yet here it was—recorded sound. a

The public was first teased with the possibility of “bottling sound” in 1878 when d
thirty-one-year-old inventor Thomas A. Edison demonstrated his new tinfoil pho- a
nograph. At first it was only a laboratory curiosity. Not until a decade or so later did a
more or less permanent wax cylinder recordings of sin gers, orators, and jokesmiths ji
begin to be heard in hamlets across America. Eventually even presidential candi- -
dates sent out prerecorded speeches on cylinders and discs in which they person- ad
ally explained the issues and exhorted voters. The idea that a singer or speaker could #
be heard across the land, and thata person could be heard after death, was nothing id
short of a miracle, even to citizens in the Age of Wonders. a

Generally overlooked has been the effect this revolution had on the integration a
of minorities into the social mainstream. Jews, Italians, and others who would 5
hardly have been welcomed into the neighborhood in person carried their cultural ad

values into many a genteel Victorian parlor through the medium of recordings. i
Once there, it can be argued, they gradually became less threatening. Blacks faced a
the most difficult challenge of all. Considered no more than animal chattel in the
days of slavery, barely thirty years earlier, they livedina rigidly segregated, inferior a
world. Entertainment was one of the few fields in which they could achieve some a
prominence, but until the advent of mass media this was largely a localized phe- 3
nomenon. It was one thing for a black man named Bert Williams to become a stage 3
star in liberal New York, but once his recordings began to be bought and played in dj
homes and neighborhood entertainment establishments everywhere, at least a 4
small step had been taken toward the acceptance of his race. a
Blacks’ entry into the recording studio was not easily accomplished, but it took ‘al
place much earlier than most historians acknowledge. Our focus will be on the first , ia
thirty years of the industry, from 1890 to 1919, prior to the explosion in black record- i
ing in the 1920s. These are the stories of the very first black recording artists. “
Mass Media and the Integration of Minorities into the Mainstream 4
Several overarching themes emerge from these performers’ biographies. The first j F ‘
is the way in which a new technology provided opportunities for a minority that z i?
was excluded from other fields of endeavor. Then, as now, technology tended to : _
gradually break down social barriers. The white, and mostly young, entrepreneurs ; «
who were struggling to build the new recording industry did not set out to change : af
the social order. They simply did not have the luxury of enforcing irrational social i i
conventions like “the color line.” Looked down upon themselves by more estab- a
lished interests, such as banking and commerce, the “talking machine men” re- .
cruited any performer who could induce people to buy their records and drop nick- { i
els into their automatic music machines. If that was a black man singing “The ‘ i
Whistling Coon” ora black quartet singing “Swing Low, Sweet Chariot,” so be it. ' 4
2 INTRODUCTION me q
a

--- Page 3 ---
In the same way that media such as movies, radio, and television would later open
doors to previously excluded minorities, the new medium of recording offered
blacks an opportunity to be heard across America precisely because it was not run
by the old-line, white establishment.!

Despite the relative openness of the recordin g industry, any path was rarely easy
for blacks during this era. Considering what these pioneers had to overcome, their
stories resemble a kind of “profiles in black courage.” George W. Johnson, an ex-
slave, could gain employment only by singing songs mocking his own tace; likewise,
Williams and Walker had to begin as “Two Real Coons” before stardom allowed
them to soften their material. Even then they were boycotted by bigoted white per-
formers like Walter C. Kelly, who would not appear on the same stage with them.
In 1910 Williams was almost prevented from joining the Ziegfeld Follies due to the
protests of white cast members. To placate them, Florenz Ziegfeld promised that
Williams would not appear on stage with any white females.

Conservatory-trained baritone Carroll Clark chafed at being allowed to sing only
sentimental songs about the Old South, while his picture was never published and
his label concealed his race. Charley Case, a very popular stage humorist, lived with
an even greater frustration, the persistent rumor that he was “passing for white.” He
eventually shot himself. On the other side of the racial divide, Polk Miller, a wealthy
white Southerner and apologist for slavery, toured American with a black quartet
illustrating the black music he had grown up with on his father’s Virginia planta-
tion. His 1909 Edison recordings are perhaps the most direct musical link we have
to black music in the pre-Civil War South. Ironically, he was forced to quit touring
by the same prejudice he had encouraged when audiences refused to accept a white
man on stage with blacks.

| Others tackled barriers no less formidable. Jim Europe fought successfully to
establish high musical standards and improved working conditions for black mu-
sicians in New York, despite opposition from white unions. He pioneered in bring-
- ing syncopated black music to a white audience through his records. He faced down
_ racists in the South during his Army days and became a war hero in France before
being stabbed to death by one of his own musicians in 1919. His protege, Dan
Kildare, was on the path to a brilliant career as a bandleader and composer when he
apparently fell under the influence of drugs and died in a triple homicide in Lon-
don in 1920.
.- Crusty composer Will Marion Cook fought other types of battles. After paying
* his dues in early black theater, he began to insist on artistic integrity and music that
: reflected his black heritage in the face of commercial pressures to do otherwise. The
“3 team of Sissle and Blake, on the other hand, largely “sold out” and gave the white
22 folks what they wanted.” They nevertheless achieved unparalleled success, and re-
7 , opened the Broadway stage to black musicals in the early 19208.
-. . Roland Hayes overcame incredible odds to make the first records of black con-
_ cert music. W. C. Handy showed that a black man could extract himself from the
3 clutches of white publishers and successfully own and publish his own music. It
Hn i wasn’t easy, and he almost lost everything in the early 1920s. Almost every story told
- t here contains examples of the struggle to bring black musical culture to America.
; INTRODUCTION

--- Page 4 ---
A second major theme that emerges from these stories concerns how whites "y
interacted with these early black artists. Race relations in the United States were not ty
a simple matter of black versus white. To be sure there were extremists, dyed-in-the- a
wool racists who fought fiercely to maintain the status quo, and reformers who en
fought just as strongly for equality. Most whites were somewhere in the middle. _ sin
Many accepted the prevailing assumption that blacks were an inferior class (e.g., —
ethnomusicologist Natalie Curtis Burlin’s patronizing characterization of them as _- a
“a child-race”) but nevertheless provided a helping hand. Sometimes they even ail
defied the law, as in the case of the Moore family of pre-Civil War Virginia when oo
they took George W. Johnson into their home and taught him to read and write. . &
Later the son of Johnson’s one-time owner came to his defense in a questionable i
murder trial, as did numerous other whites who knew him. White boxing authori- ~
ties and some politicians intervened on behalf of Jack Johnson when racists were -
trying to run him out of the sport, and even biased newspapers had to admit that a
he had won his title fairly. Vernon and Irene Castle enthusiastically promoted the Le ey
career of black bandleader Jim Europe, as did Joan Sawyer that of Dan Kildare (Saw- ~ Si
yer was a suffragist, which may have given her some perspective on what it meant “yy
to be denied one’s rights). Showman Flo Ziegfeld was color-blind in promoting Bert oe
Williams and bandleader Ford Dabney, and many white hands helped Sissle and tg

Blake, W. C. Handy, Roland Hayes, and Harry T. Burleigh further their careers. ne
Ona human level segregation and “the color line” collided with a basic Ameri- wy
can value—that of fairness. This was perhaps most blindingly clear in the case of Jack oes
Johnson. Eventually, something had to give. 5
ar
How It All Began: The Birth of the Recording Industry - 2
The phonograph was invented, as most schoolchildren know, by Thomas A. Edison ee, an
in 1877. It was first demonstrated to the public the following year. Edison’s original og SS
invention was a clumsy affair that recorded indentations on a strip of tinfoil wag me
wrapped around a revolving drum. It was barely audible, and a few playings of a - og
newly recorded piece of tinfoil quickly obliterated it. Moreover, the tinfoil could not
be removed from the drum without destroying it—hence, there were no permanent ;
recordings. The fact that sound had been reproduced at all was a miracle, but clearly re a
the equipment needed a lot of work. Unfortunately, after several months of dem- es ae
onstrating the device to an easily-awed public, Edison was compelled to put it aside Letty
in order to concentrate on his rapidly developing (and more lucrative) electric light. i ot
For nearly ten years the phonograph lay fallow, a laboratory curiosity. Other - ~~
inventors puttered with it and gradually improved it enough to arouse Edison’s jeal- eh eg
ousy and anger. It had been, after all, his invention. In 1886, with characteristic setts
energy, he plunged back into the field and within a year produced an improved tats
machine, recording on more or less “permanent,” removable, wax cylinders. At first = tls
both Edison and his competitors believed the phonograph’s principal use would be foe
for business dictation and for household appliances such as talking clocks. What oe
may be the oldest playable recording now in existence (from c. 1878) is in fact the =“.
voice of a man slowly reciting “one o’clock, two o’clock, three o’clock . . . .”* coe as
4 INTRODUCTION : rg yy

--- Page 5 ---
The production of entertainment records began on a small scale in 1888 by
Edison and a few local companies, but it remained fora group of entrepreneurs in
Washington, D.C., to become the principal promoters of recordings as an entertain-
ment medium. Their enterprise was incorporated in 1889 as the Columbia Phono-
graph Company and is the lineal ancestor of today’s Sony/CBS Records.‘ At first their
products were sold not to individuals but to exhibitors who demonstrated them at
fairs and in other public places. Automatic music machines (much later dubbed
“jukeboxes”) were set up where curious patrons could drop a coin in the slot and
hear the latest popular song. The first commercial phonographs were large, expen-
sive, battery-driven units. By the late 1890s smaller and less expensive spring-driven
models had been developed and were being sold to the public at large. Records, both

cylinders and the newer discs, began to find their way into the home.

During the 1890s few established performers deigned to record forthe fledgling
phonograph companies, which probably could not have afforded them anyway. For
an established star, stage work was far more lucrative, and the primitive, squawk-
ing phonograph was a novelty item some felt was “beneath” them. In addition,
recording required a special kind of voice, one that penetrated through the still-
severe limitations of the technology and could at least be understood. Clarity and
articulation were greatly valued (how times have changed!). Women generally did
not record well, nor did softer instruments such as the piano or ensemble strings.
Asaresult, most recordings were made by the same small group of performers, little
known in the larger world of entertainment and located mostly in the recording
centers of the Northeast. Virtually all of them were white, as were the businessmen
who ran the industry. The phonograph was a white middle-class toy, and in the rig-
idly segregated America of the 1890s the idea that this “mass” medium might reach
into other strata of society scarcely occurred to most people. Anyone, that is, except
the hard-pressed recording companies struggling to survive. A dollarisa dollar, and

several of the early entrepreneurs recognized that their white customers would pay
to hear blacks entertain them on those coin-in-the-slot juke boxes, and at least some
blacks would pay to hear “their own.” And so the stage was set.
Who Was First?
The first black to make records for commercial sale appears to have been a middle-
aged panhandler from the streets of New York City. Jovial street musician George
W. Johnson became one of the best-known and most successful recording artists of
his time, producing two of the biggest selling records of the entire decade of the
1890s. While many aspects of this era are shrouded in obscurity, Johnson’s first re-
cordings can be dated with some precision. Entries in the ledgers of the Metropoli-
tan Phonograph Company of New York document that his cylinders were being sold
: by them in May 1890. They do not appear in ac. January 1890 catalog issued by the
company, so he presumably began recording between January and May. By the
: summer of 1890 his cylinders were already quite popular, leading toa long and suc-
cessful career in front of the recording horn. It is possible that someone obscure and
unknown preceded him, but for now we will assume he was the first.
$ INTRODUCTION

--- Page 6 ---
If the definition is expanded to “first to record” (not necessarily for commercial
sale), there are a number of candidates. Several companies made cylinders for their
own use in exhibitions in 1888 and 1889, and some of them recruited blacks to per-
form. A newspaper account of a phonograph exhibition given by a Mr. Wicks on
January 7, 1889, ata Kansas City hotel, reported, “Then came the reproduction ofa |
song rendered about one week ago by one of the colored waiters of the hotel. It was
‘Dixie,’ and the rich music peculiar to the darkey seemed admirably adapted to the ;
phonograph. Mr. Wicks says that when the darkey first heard his song reproduced
he was frightened half out of his wits. He thought he was ‘hoodooed.’” An Albany,
New York, exhibition in July 1889 included a cylinder by “a negro street quartet.”
One account said, “Negro street singers, whose melodies were caught from the office 4
windows in New York, gave ‘The Magnolia Tree,’ with banjo accompaniment, in
true darkey style.”’ So from the very beginning black Americans whistled “Dixie”
and offered up streetcorner quartets to sing for the phonograph.
In the fall of 1889 the Missouri Phonograph Company exhibited at an exposi-
tion in St. Louis, where it made demonstration recordings by, among others, “the
best colored quartettes [in the city].”° Other early examples of black exhibition re-
cordings include those of the Bohee Brothers (James and George), Afro-Canadian
song-and-dance men of the 1880s and 1890s whose specialty was playing dual ban- ‘
jos while dancing. In 1890 they were living and performing in England. The evi- '
dence that they recorded that early is a November 1890 advertisement placed by }
Douglas Archibald, a showman traveling in Australia, who included in his phono- '
graph exhibition a cylinder recorded by them. Since Archibald left England for '
Australia around March 1890 and “likely” brought the Bohee cylinder with him,
they may have recorded in 1889 or early 1890.” Among the other custom-made cyl-
inders exhibited by Archibald were spirituals by “the Jubilee Coloured Concert
Company of New York,” possibly made during Archibald’s stop in New York in April \
1890 on his way to Australia.
However, the honor of “first black to record” might well belong to the aforemen-
tioned George W. Johnson. In later years a publicity item mentioned that he had i
recorded for Edison’s original tinfoil phonograph, presumably during the tinfoil i
exhibition period in 1879 and 1880.
Entry of Blacks into the Record Industry
Once the commercial record industry got underway in the early 1890s other blacks a
followed Johnson into the studio. The first wave included performers from the black '
vaudeville and tent-show circuits who, though not headliners, were reasonably well
known at the time. They included the Unique Quartette, which toured widely in the
Northeast, and the Standard Quartette, a featured act in the touring spectacle South ’
before the War. Louis “Bebe” Vasnier was a popular local minstrel performer in his '
hometown of New Orleans when the Louisiana Phonograph Company made him
one ofits star attractions. Blacks and whites alike listened to his “Brudder Rasmus” |
sermons on coin-slot phonographs in the city’s public venues and summer resorts.
By the early 1900s more famous black performers were being engaged to record. '
6 INTRODUCTION i

--- Page 7 ---
SDS
Bert Williams and George Walker were already stars on Broadway when the fledgling
Victor Talking Machine Company persuaded them to make a few discs in 1901. Vic- }
tor said that it had paid handsomely for the privilege. The Fisk University Jubilee 1
Singers were world famous when they began recording for Victor in 1909, and Polk:

Miller and his Old South Quartette were nationally known at the time of their

Edison sessions in that year.

Additional well-known blacks stepped in front of the recording horn during the
second decade of the century. James Reese Europe was the “hot” bandleader for
dancers Vernon and Irene Castle when he made the first black orchestra recordings
in the United States in I9I3. Following him into the studio was Dan Kildare,
bandleader for Castle tival Joan Sawyer. The eminent composer Will Marion Cook
led his Afro-American Folk Song Singers in a 1914 recording, and the Tuskegee In-
stitute Singers (a chorus) also began recording in that year.
When America was swept up in the jazz craze in 1917, black artists were, appro-

priately, among the first to record the new music or Variations on it. Wilbur C.

Sweatman, Ford T. Dabney’s Broadway orchestra, and W. C. Handy’s Memphis

musicians (most of them actually from Chicago) all made numerous discs. Noble

Sissle and Eubie Blake brought ragtime and show music to record buyers, while the

lively Right Quintette and the elegant Four Harmony Kings reproduced their caba-

ret acts. Black concert music finally began to be heard with tenor Roland Hayes’s
Privately produced recordings in 1918 and the founding of the black-owned Broome
Special Phonograph label in 1919. Broome issued historic and little-known record-
ings by such prominent artists as Harry T. Burleigh, Florence Cole-Talbert, R.
Nathaniel Dett, and Clarence Cameron White. Public figures on record included
educator Booker T, Washington and controversial boxing champ Jack Johnson.

A few black Americans recorded in Europe but not in the United States prior to
1920, among them Pete Hampton and Belle Davis. These expatriates will not be dealt
with here; for more information on them the reader is urged to seek out the excel-
lent but unfortunately little-known book Black People: Entertainers of African Descent
in Europe and Germany by Rainer Lotz,

While white record companies were willing to record blacks, they wanted those :

who would appeal to white customers. Curiously, the prevailing thinking was that .
blacks themselves were nota market worth pursuing, so certain types of music, pre-
sumed not of interest to the white majority, were ignored. Some interesting docu-
ments have surfaced that directly address this situation. In 191 5 violinist Clarence
Cameron White wrote to Victor urging that it record black concert artists. The com-
pany declined, saying that blacks would not Support their own and that whites cared
only about excellence (implying that black artists weren’t good enough). The fol-
lowing year the Chicago Defender, a black newspaper, started a campaign to find out
how many blacks had phonographs, so that the information could be used to per-
suade the record companies to relent. Nothing came of this. (See the chapters on
White and Roland Hayes for more.)

Also ignored, to the great dismay of modern collectors were folk blues and other
“roots” music. The companies were probably correct in assuming that such unfa-
miliar sounds would find little favor with white consumers. It is notable that there

“ INTRODUCTION

--- Page 8 ---
were no black executives making recording decisions prior to the World War I era,
_ when Roland Hayes and entrepreneur George W. Broome decided to market records 4
. themselves. Until then, patent laws gave effective control of the industry to three 4
large companies, Victor, Columbia, and Edison, which ensured that there would be :
no smaller operators to explore peripheral genres. i
Comparison of White versus Black Recordings 4
A question debated among record researchers is how well early recordings actually ;
reflect the musical culture of their time. It is true that recordings are sometimes not
representative of public performance styles. Record companies employed a small ,
group of regular singers whose voices recorded well and who were available to work
cheaply and for long hours. Most specialized in recording and were seldom heard .
by alive audience. Their “audience” was a tin recording horn, and they adapted their
styles to its requirements with strong projection, exaggerated articulation, and very
even modulation (the acoustic recording process was not very good at capturing soft
and loud passages). Performances were generally strict readings of published mu-
sic with minimal improvisation. This is why so many early recordings sound “stiff”
to today’s ears.

Instrumentation was also modified for recording. Orchestras were replaced by
brass bands, which were in turn cut down for the cramped recording studio (only
about a dozen men from Sousa’s fifty-man Marine Band actually recorded as
“Sousa’s Band”). Vocal accompaniments were tampered with, as illustrated by the
treatment of songs from the hit Broadway musical Florodora.® At least fifty-eight
recordings of songs from the show were made during its original run in 1901-2. On
stage these songs were performed by both female and male cast members, often as ’
production numbers with choruses and accompaniment by the house orchestra.

The showstopper, “Tell Me, Pretty Maiden,” was sung by a double sextet of men and
women. However neatly every vocal recording of songs from the show was by a male
vocalist with piano accompaniment. Anything more than that was too complicated
to record. Instrumental versions were by clarinets, banjos, zithers, and brass bands,
instrumentation never heard in the theater.
Some white entertainers did preserve their public performance style on record '
(Al Jolson, Enrico Caruso), but they were the exception. In the main the song, not '
_ the performer, sold the record. |
In contrast, black recordings appear to be relatively accurate representations of
: black performance style in this period. After all, the purpose of recording black art-
ists was to offer a novelty, “Negro music” as it was heard in theaters and on the
streets. While few white recording artists had outside performing careers, nearly all '
of the blacks who recorded did so. Most of them were not professional recording '
artists, but rather professional artists who were asked to record. George W. Johnson 4
probably slurred “The Laughing Song” (for effect) much the same on the streets of
New Yorkas he did in the recording studio; the Unique and Standard quartets in the
1890s and the Fisk Jubilee Singers in the 1910s sang their fervent spirituals much the
8 INTRODUCTION .

--- Page 9 ---
same on record as on tour; and Jim Europe’s Clef Club orchestra, with its unusually
large mandolin section and shouted interjections, sounded the same on record as
in descriptions of its concerts. Reverend J. A. Myers and Edward Sterling Wright read
poetry, Bert Williams delivered his half-spoken songs, and the Right Quintette per-
formed their talking/singing cabaret act much as they did in public. All of these
sound quite different from white recording artists of the period, and most are any-
thing but stiff.

Even more remarkably, the personalities profiled here represent an exception- ;
ally wide range of black music and culture, including popular and concert songs,
band music, spirituals, monologues, speeches, even poetry readings. It is an aural
portrait of black musical culture at the turn of the twentieth century, in consider- -
able diversity.

Where Are These Records Today? A Plea for Preservation

and Dissemination

Records by most of these artists still exist. The advent of the CD has brought a boom
in the field of reissues, and while most of it focuses on rock, big bands, and jazz of
the 1920s—saleable product that can bring quick profits—specialist labels such as
Europe’s Document label have reissued discs and even cylinders from the late nine-
teenth and early twentieth centuries.

Just in time, I might add. Recordings from a hundred years ago are in dire need
of preservation. This is especially true of the soft wax cylinders made in the 1890s,
which are highly vulnerable to deterioration and breakage. The vast majority of
copies are already lost, and many of the remainder have deteriorated beyond repair,

| with the recorded sound barely audible under a sea of surface noise. A few examples
| can still be found in good condition, for example, the remarkably clear 1893 Edison
| cylinder described in the chapter on the Unique Quartette.
: They probably won’t survive much longer. It is not too late to save what is left;
1 however, record companies and even public archives have shown little interest in
, preserving commercial recordings of this early era, presumably because they are not
as trendy as jazz of the 1920s. While record companies might be excused for focus-
4 ing on profits, there is no excuse for the scandalous neglect of this earliest sound
t heritage by publicly funded archives. A survey by this author of the five largest pub-
lic sound archives in the United States revealed that they hold only a few hundred
yf commercial cylinder recordings from the 1890s between them; most surviving ex-
t- amples are in private hands. There is no organized program of preservation of pub-
e licly and privately held early recordings by transfer to modern media. Unlike
AL flammable nitrate motion-picture film, wax cylinders do not threaten to burn down
1g the building, so funding for their preservation has been given secondary priority.
n In a few more decades, the problem will in a sense be solved, as there may be noth-
of ing left to preserve.
he Private collectors have been chiefly responsible for saving most of what now
he exists; however, they are not trained or equipped for professional preservation work,
9 INTRODUCTION

--- Page 10 ---
and much has been lost through simple ignorance (see the sad story of the one sur-

viving cylinder by early black minstrel Louis Vasnier). Moreover, when collectors

die their collections are usually broken up and sold, or sometimes simply discarded

by uncaring heirs.

Using Copyright Law to Suppress Black History

Preservation is of little value if these historic sound documents are kept inaccessible

to students and scholars. Most people are not aware that this inaccessibility is not

due to a lack of parties willing to reissue them but rather to extremely onerous copy-

right laws in the United States that have the effect of actively suppressing the cir-

culation of historic recordings. Not only can present-day record companies decline

to reissue this material themselves, but they can—and do—prevent others from i
, doing so by legal action or by demanding exorbitant fees. :

Some early recordings made by now-defunct companies have entered the pub- ai
lic domain, but many are under the control of modern successor corporations such "
as BMG (successor to Berliner and Victor) and Sony Music (Columbia). With the ’
cooperation of a compliant U.S. Congress, the principle of copyright as a reward for
creativity has been perverted into a tool to ensure the more or less permanent con- |
trol of creative works by these huge multinational corporations. The number of
years historic recordings are owned by them, not us, has been steadily lengthened,
most recently by the quaintly named “Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act” '
of 1998. Under current U.S. law the earliest black recordings covered in this book
(from about 1890) will be under the control of modern corporations until 2067, that
is, for more than 170 years. Until, of course, the next “copyright term extension act.”

Based on my research I estimate that approximately eight hundred commercial
recordings were made by African Americans prior to 1920.!° The majority still exist
in some form, but about half are controlled by successor corporations that will nei-
ther release them nor allow others to do so. Of the four hundred still under copy-
right I know of only two that have been reissued by the copyright holders in the CD j
era (see the discography). There is a demand for such recordings, as demonstrated
by the fact that more than one hundred have been reissued by overseas labels who :
are not subject to U.S. law or illegally by small operators in the United States. These 4
are often hard to find. For legal reasons few established labels, associations, or ar-
chives are willing to risk publishing such reissues.

European countries, which seem to care more about their cultural heritage than
does the United States, generally have fifty-year copyright terms for recordings. That
is why so many reissues of early American material emanate from abroad. U.S. com-
panies have attempted to deny those reissues to American citizens through laws
forbidding “parallel imports” of recordings they control, though these laws are of- j
ten not enforced. The bottom line is that early black recorded history—indeed, all
early recorded history—is being held hostage by ill-advised laws that serve no one’s
interests, except perhaps those of the lawyers who are kept employed enforcing 4
them. Modern record companies and artists have a right to have exclusive control
of their creations for a reasonable period (the U.S. Constitution speaks of copyright

10 INTRODUCTION

--- Page 11 ---
id
for “limited times”) and to secure effective protection against infringement durin g
that period. But 170 years is clearly not “limited times.”

I hope that our scholarly, archival, and political communities will wake up to ,
the outrageous Suppression and in some cases actual destruction of our earliest
sound heritage. I have made that appeal before, and I will make it again.’! We must
act before it is too late.
Organization of This Book
Part 1 traces the life and career of George W. Johnson, the first successful black re-
cording artist. Because so little has been written about him, and because his story is
so interesting, he is treated at some length. Parts 2-5 look at black artists who fol- :
lowed Johnson on record in the United States. Part 6 consists of a chapter about
miscellaneous, unissued, and unconfirmed recordings by blacks prior to 1920, and
a few mysteries. An appendix by Dick Spottswood on pre-I920 recordings by blacks
in the Caribbean and South America is followed by the endnotes, a select di scogra-
phy of CD reissues, a bibliography, and an index.
:
Loy INTRODUCTION ;
