--- Page 1 ---
iS
rr 1A rt 4
ae i) 1
mil ee
Lae we ot
os ‘ r
o :
Bebop: Modern New York Jazz
Author(s): Peter Rutkoff and William Scott
Source: The Kenyon Review, Spring, 1996, New Series, Vol. 18, No. 2 (Spring, 1996), pp.
91-121
Published by: Kenyon College
Stable URL: |https://www.jstor.org/stable/ 4337359
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Kenyon College is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
eC OI Kenyon Review
aes
wes
This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 2 ---
PETER RUTKOFF
WILLIAM SCOTT
BEBOP: MODERN NEW YORK JAZZ
from NEW YORK MODERN: THE ARTS AND THE CITY
N November 26, 1945, six young African-Americans entered the
O recording studios of radio station WOR in New York. Teddy Reig,
artists and repertoire man for Savoy records, had engaged Charlie
Parker and his Beboppers for the session. Parker’s group, the first that he
directed, had played together for barely a month, performing at the Spotlight,
one of Fifty-second Street’s many jazz bars, in the evenings before moving to
Minton’s, a musicians’ after-hours club in Harlem.!

Savoy paid two hundred dollars for the studio time and Parker earned
three hundred dollars for the four compositions.” The second cut recorded that
day, “Ko-Ko,” whose jagged melody Parker constructed over the harmonic
structure of another tune, “Cherokee,” would become Parker’s great contribu-
tion to the bebop revolution. Energetic, sometimes frantic, and bluesy, bebop’s
incendiary style, pulsing rhythm, and intensity contrasted with the melodic,
linear, and commercial qualities of swing. Yet the innovators of bop schooled
themselves in the jazz of the 1930s, and as they pushed swing to its limits they
discovered a new music, one which they could begin to call their own.

Parker’s group began the first take of “Ko-Ko” with a tight and fast chase
between Parker’s saxophone and Dizzy Gillespie’s trumpet; the taut harmonic
statement would become a hallmark of bebop expression. After the opening
eight bars, even as the group maintained its breakneck speed, the musicians
drifted back, as if by habit, to the original melody of “Cherokee” that Parker had
been determined to leave behind. After less than forty seconds Parker lowered
his mouthpiece, clapped his hands, whistled, and said, “Hey, hey. Hold it.”

When they resumed, they clearly conformed to Parker’s vision. In place of
the danceable and melodically straightforward “Cherokee,” they played bebop.
The harmonic complexity, rhythmic drive, and above all the improvisational

gI
This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 3 ---
g2 THE KENYON REVIEW

gestures of “Ko-Ko,” built on Parker’s mastery of the blues, distinguished
it from its swing predecessor. In the space of a few moments Parker’s
group grasped the difference between swing and bop, creating a new form
of American jazz.

Miles Davis, then only nineteen, joined fellow trumpet player Dizzy
Gillespie, bassist Curley Russell, drummer Max Roach, pianist Argonne Thorn-
ton, and Parker in the historic session. Davis, however, found the opening
section of “Ko-Ko” so daunting that he let Gillespie, who had been playing
trumpet professionally for almost a decade, play in unison with Parker’s alto
saxophone.*

Gillespie’s and Parker’s opening section burst from their instruments with
controlled tightness and precision. The staccato notes pushed forward, each one
a sound in its own space, each separate from the next. Passing the theme back
and forth the players resumed for a last measure, and then paused. The opening
statement of “Ko-Ko” hid the innovative style of drummer Max Roach, who,
along with Kenny Clarke, had begun to redefine the jazz percussion, preferring
to keep time with the cymbal, leaving the bass drum free to accent irregularly.
The Parker-Gillespie introduction only hinted at Parker’s reformulation of
modern jazz.°

Davis explained, “Bird was a fast motherfucker.” Parker’s solo became
legendary for its intensity and its facility, and remarkable for its combination
of tempo and lyricism.® In two minutes Parker explored every aspect of his
alto’s range. One moment screeching as Parker stretched to reach one note from
inside the preceding one, another soaring melodically through the notes of a
chord progression insinuated by the piano’s occasional remnants of the original
tune, Parker played one of the “greatest solos in the history of jazz.’ Based
on a combination of multiple key signatures coexisting in a single, unified,
yet, improvised and finally linear melodic statement, Parker’s work in “Ko-
Ko” pushed modern jazz toward atonality. As he careened through the song’s
complex “labyrinth,” Parker created a “showpiece” and a masterpiece.®

As Parker worked his way through the recording, his playing became
both more complex and more lyrical. He moved his alto up and down the
pathways of each phrase, creating a fluidity that united harmonic and rhythmic
experimentation. In contrast to the hard-edged opening and closing sections
of “Ko-Ko,” Parker and Gillespie, with close and tightly controlled musical
punches, first in unison, then in solo and once again in unison, played a swirl of
almost pure abstraction. The atmospherics of ““Ko-Ko,” its color and movement,
its design and mood, became its content. Yet, despite Parker’s ferocious speed
and virtuosity, the roots of “Ko-Ko” lay in the blues, reaching back to the
“tragic accent” reminiscent of Bessie Smith.’

In contrast, in the midst of an inventive riff, as his alto moved in and out of
an almost perceptively recognized melodic figure, Parker disclosed the tune of
“Tea for Two” imbedded in the pattern of his musical ideas. That remnant served
as pun and evidence, a display of a reality that Parker’s invention had displaced,

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 4 ---
PETER RUTKOFF and WILLIAM SCOTT 93
a reminder that a representational world lay just beyond his music’s abstraction.
In the fall of 1945, Charles Parker, age twenty-six, broke into a parallel realm of
musical abstraction. Framed by the chordal harmonic structure of “Cherokee,”
Parker’s composition “Ko-Ko” centered on new jazz ideas. The suggestion of
“Tea for Two,” however, attracted attention and demanded explanation. Jazz
musicians, Parker included, had played this commercial snippet for a decade
as they elaborated the harmonic structure of “Cherokee.” Parker acknowledged
the song’s short, but important history, and revealed the extent to which the
apparent sudden revolution of bebop was simultaneously a painstaking process
of musical innovation. It also implied a social world beyond jazz.

Previously Parker and other African-American musicians played and
composed jazz only to have white musicians claim credit and financial rewards
through the process of “covering.” With bebop, Parker and his group created a
form of jazz they regarded as uncoverable. In “Ko-Ko,” Parker used the pasted
scrap of “Tea for Two” to taunt the white dominated music business. “Ko-Ko”
had begun, here, with laughter, moved to derision, and culminated in anger.
Parker sought to sabotage Tin Pan Alley with his virtuoso performance and
inimical composition.

The short phrase from popular music’s most easily recognized tune also
served as an ironic allusion to a shift in the politics of the music business.
From mid-1942 to 1944 a ban on recording had left jazz performers without a
mass audience. Denied access to recording and radio, jazz musicians scratched
out livings, playing in small clubs and for each other. The emergence of
bebop was, in part, a consequence of the commercial exile of jazz during
World War II. The curious quotation of “Ko-Ko” reminded audiences and
promoters that things had changed. Parker left standing only a fragment of
jazz’s past. In revolutionizing the form of modern jazz, Parker and others
threatened to revolutionize the business of jazz, liberating it from commer-
cial entertainment and establishing it as art, controlled and defined neither
by popular-taste commercial producers, but by its artists, most of whom
were black.

Parker closed “Ko-Ko” with the structure it opened with, the pushing
trumpet-alto restatement of the ““Cherokee”-derived theme. He brought the tune
back to its immediate historical roots, acknowledging its jazz heritage.

Long considered a “mystery” session, the Savoy recording of “Ko-Ko,”
which Gillespie regarded as “just perfect, man,” revealed how innovatively
challenging the musicians judged the piece. Davis, still in awe of Parker,
knew that he couldn’t handle the opening section, and he realized that Parker
knew it as well. “I wasn’t ready for the tempo,” he said, “it’s the damndest
introduction I ever heard in my life.”'° Bebop’s requirement of extraordinary
virtuosity, both tempo and technique, represented yet another barrier against
expropriation. That Gillespie slipped into the pianist’s slot later, feeding Parker
the harmonic outlines of his solo, testified to his musicianship. Parker’s genius
for improvisational spontaneity found in Gillespie a thoughtful jazz performer.

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 5 ---
94 THE KENYON REVIEW
As Gillespie recalled, “Yard and I were like two peas. We played all our
regular shit.”!!

John Berks Gillespie, called Dizzy because, it was said, he was “dizzy as
a fox,” understood the significance of the bebop revolution. “Our music,” he
wrote, “emerged from the war years—the Second World War, and it reflected
these times... fast and furious.” The sheer speed of bop, which intimidated
the otherwise arrogant Davis, who had just declared that Juilliard had nothing
more to teach him, was a breathless, even desperate attempt to create something
unique, inimical. “Sometimes,” Gillespie continued, “when you know the laws
you can break them.”!?

The economic laws of the record business also challenged the young jazz
revolutionaries. When Savoy producer Reig approached Parker to compose four
original tunes, he thought “‘Ko-Ko’ wasn’t nothing but ‘Cherokee.’”!? Reig
pulled the new name out of the air. “I told them ‘Ko-Ko’ to make sure Charlie
didn’t have to pay seventy-five dollars (in royalties). Otherwise Lubinsky,
the owner, would have had a baby.”!* In fact, Teddy Reig’s attribution of
the song’s title was deceptive. “Ko-Ko,” a composition by Duke Ellington,
had been performed by the Ellington orchestra five years earlier, in 1940.
Ellington credited the title to Congo Square in New Orleans where, explained
Ellington, nineteenth-century African-Americans convened to talk and dance,
and that was where, some thought, “jazz was born.”!> The change in the tune’s
title did protect the new owners/producers/composers from paying royalties to
the Tin Pan Alley music factory. But changing the song, restructuring a new
melody on top of the original’s harmony, involved much more than changing
the name.

The middle section, the bridge of “Ko-Ko,” animated the song’s new
structure, demonstrated Parker’s musicianship, that he had “woodshedded his
chords and scales,” and served as a testing ground for a generation of musicians
to come.!® Parker’s solo codified not just a new approach to playing jazz, but
his extraordinary virtuosity institutionalized, unintentionally, an aspect of jazz
culture that Parker had brought with him from his musical roots in Kansas City.
There in the 1930s, as in Harlem in the 1940s, jamming musicians participated
in a competitive ritual, the cutting contest, a proving ground for individual
improvisational talent designed to demonstrate who blew best. Parker’s work
on “Ko-Ko” said no contest. Because bebop placed such a high value on
the improvisational, the gestural, on the process of discovery, many of the
musicians, Parker notoriously, avoided rehearsal and took the jam session into
the studio. Savoy’s recording of Parker’s solo on “Ko-Ko” froze a moment of
unparalleled jazz improvisation.

Even Parker’s contracts were original. Parker created a publishing com-
pany in his own name to copyright the new jazz pieces which he had composed,
many on the same harmonic-melodic basis as ““Ko-Ko.” His company paid him
two cents a side for his rights when other musicians recorded his work. Parker
also agreed to allow his company, called Parker-Dial, to pay half of his royalties

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 6 ---
PETER RUTKOFF and WILLIAM SCOTT 95
to one Emery Bryd, a Los Angeles drug dealer whom Parker immortalized as
“Moose the Mooche”.!'’ Parker’s notorious drug habit killed him in 1955.

In the aftermath of World War II Charlie Parker and Dizzy Gillespie
revolutionized jazz. Abandoning commercialized music of the swing era with its
conventional harmonic structure, they turned inward, discovering new harmonic
relationships and creating a fast, dissonant, improvisational jazz that exceeded
the ability and understanding of most conventional jazz musicians. Bebop
emphasized virtuosity, individuality, and artistic innovation suitable to small
groups playing to informed audiences in intimate settings. Modern jazz divorced
itself, self-consciously, from commercial entertainment. Bebop’s liberation of
jazz from show business, however, represented more than a musical revolution.
By asserting its artistic identity and drawing on African-American blues, bebop
enabled black jazz musicians to liberate themselves from white control as they
revitalized a jazz that had become stagnant and formulaic.

On the eve of World War II the big bands of the “Swing Era” found
themselves circumscribed by the tastes of their adoring fans and the demands of
their agents, record companies, and theater owners. Swing became the familiar
music of dancing at Savoy, its tunes a recast of the familiar. Parker and Gillespie
restored the blues to jazz, reconnecting it with its African-American origins.
Bebop enabled them to express their cultural as well as their artistic identities.
They played jazz that expressed their feelings and ideas.

When Charlie Parker recorded “Ko-Ko” in 1945, he was a relatively
unknown itinerant jazz musician with a certain insider’s reputation for im-
provisational genius born of the after-hours jam sessions that he irregularly
frequented. Several years later, weighed down by the legend of his subsequent
success—commercial, critical, mythical—Bird became the subject of intense
scrutiny. When one interviewer learned that Parker had been born and schooled
in Kansas City, he asked, “Did you ever listen to Lester Young?” Parker replied,
“Every night.’’!®

Before Bebop: Breaking the Rules

with Hammond, Lady, and Prez

If swing was the midwife of bebop, the process of transformation whereby
African-American musicians reclaimed their artistic heritage was a complex
one. Bebop was more than an expression of racial politics. Nevertheless, race
had a profound effect on jazz as it did on nearly everything else in American
life, and its divisions offended sensitive whites as well as blacks. Indeed, John
Hammond, one of jazz’s most important figures, was as motivated by his sense
of racial justice as his love of jazz. Young and wealthy, Hammond played a key
role in the careers of Billie Holiday, Benny Goodman, Lester Young, Count
Basie, and Charlie Christian. Largely through his efforts New York in the 1930s
became the focal point for the introduction of Southwestern, especially Kansas

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 7 ---
96 THE KENYON REVIEW

City style, into the city’s jazz tradition. Together with club owner Barney
Josephson, Hammond broke down the barriers of racial segregation in jazz.
Without Hammond’s efforts in the 1930s bebop might never have evolved
when and where it did, denying Parker and Gillespie the occasion of artistic
collaboration and creativity.

Jazz had always been a “performer’s art,” intimately connected with its
audience." Yet, in the first three decades of the twentieth century jazz remained
segregated. White musicians played, wrote, and arranged jazz, organized
orchestras and tours, made recordings and performed on the radio, often
borrowing the most innovative styles and songs of African-Americans for
their own, achieving commercial success and popularity. During the heyday of
American jazz, between the two world wars, the two racially divided aspects
of American jazz culture existed side by side. In New York jazz musicians
recorded on “race” records and in Harlem performed for black audiences at the
one-thousand-seat Lincoln and the two-thousand-seat Lafayette theaters, at the
square block large Savoy Ballroom as well as at dozens of small clubs.”° A
few black orchestras, like Duke Ellington’s and Count Basie’s, played at clubs
for whites only in Times Square or Harlem. But they traveled on segregated
trains, stayed in segregated hotels, ate in segregated restaurants, and played
in segregated bands. With few exceptions white bands received higher pay,
played at better clubs and concert halls, received more publicity, and sold
more records.”!

In the 1930s this pattern of racial segregation gave way in New York
largely because of the efforts of John Hammond and then Barney Josephson.
Hammond had been a regular visitor to Harlem since 1927 when, as a senior
at Hotchkiss, he had decided to devote his life to jazz.?* He dropped out of
Yale two years later and began collecting jazz recordings. In 1931 he moved
to an apartment on Sullivan Street in the Greenwich Village and had his name
removed from the Social Register. With the onset of the depression, supported
by his Vanderbilt family trust fund, Hammond worked as a disc jockey on
WEVD, the radio station of the Jewish Daily Forward, where he played records
from his collection and, out of his pocket, paid performers ten dollars for guest
appearances.”* Tall, awkward, and sporting a crew cut that gradually grew
white with age, Hammond wrote for several small English music periodicals
and then for the Nation, for which he covered the Scottsboro case.7* When the
NAACP invited him to join its board of directors in 1935, he readily agreed.
Wealthy, committed to racial equality, and fascinated by jazz, Hammond used
his social connections and money to promote black musicians and to end the
racial segregation of jazz in New York.

Hammond adopted a two-front strategy. First, he actively searched for
talented black jazz musicians such as Billie Holiday, Lester Young, and Charlie
Christian. Second, he persuaded white producers, club owners, and band
leaders like Benny Goodman to hire black musicians. Hammond’s first musical
discovery occurred in 1933 at Monette’s in Harlem. The owner and featured

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 8 ---
PETER RUTKOFF and WILLIAM SCOTT 97
singer, Monette Moore, asked a young singer, Billie Holiday, to substitute for
her on the evening Hammond came around. Holiday had been working in
Harlem clubs for two years, including Convan’s, the Alhambra Grill, and Pod
and Jerry’s, all clustered near Seventh Avenue and 134th Street. Hammond
described the young Holiday as a “tall self-assured girl with rich golden-brown
skin, exquisitely shown off by the pale blue of her...low cut evening frock.
Billie was not the sort you could fail to notice...in the cramped low-ceiling
quarters of a Harlem speak-easy...she came over to your table and sang to
you personally. I found her quite irresistible.”

So too did much of the jazz world. At age eighteen Holiday seemed to
have lived a lifetime, experiencing the drama and scars of Harlem where she
had worked since her arrival from Baltimore six years earlier. When Holiday
sang the blues, her audience believed she had lived them. Hammond marveled
that she possessed the unteachable gift of making every song her own.”
Holiday’s distinct, husky singing lent itself well to the swing bands of the
1930s. Barnstorming, or at city gigs, male colleagues admired her abilities at
music and cards. Holiday’s delivery —dramatic and soulful—appeared “too
artistic” for many of the music copyrighters who determined which bands and
artists received exclusive rights to popular songs. Consequently, Holiday failed
to achieve the commercial success that she desired and many believed she
deserved.’

Two years after her discovery by Hammond, Billie made her debut at
the Apollo. In April 1935, quivering fearfully in the wings, Billie was pushed
onto the stage by comedian “Pigmeat” Markham. When she “broke up the
house” with her encore rendition of “The Man I Love,” the Apollo management
booked her for a two-week run.”* That same year Billie worked with Teddy
Wilson, who with Lionel Hampton had just joined and integrated Goodman’s
orchestra. Hammond had been forcefully instrumental in that historic event,
and together with Goodman provided the social environment in which many of
the major African-American jazz performers of the 1930s could demonstrate
the vitality of their music and the virtuosity of their musicianship to their white
peers. Between 1935 and 1942 Holiday, working with Hammond and Wilson,
recorded scores of records aimed at a black jukebox audience. She worked
with Lester Young, with whom she had a special affinity, and then with the
bands of Count Basie and Artie Shaw. In 1938 with Shaw she became one
of the first black singers to star with a white swing band. Her classic jazz
repertoire derived from her association with Hammond, moving from standard
jazz ballads such as “Did I Remember” to the Bessie Smith-inspired blues of
“Fine and Mellow.”

By 1935, when Holiday first worked with Benny Goodman, Hammond
and Goodman had been musical partners and friends for more than three years.
Hammond had not restricted his New York jazz wanderings to uptown clubs,
and in 1933 he heard Goodman leading a group at the Onyx, a speakeasy on
Fifty-second Street. It was owned by Joe Helbock, a jazz fan who had placed a

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 9 ---
98 THE KENYON REVIEW

piano at the back of his place for the pleasure of the musicians who stopped by
and announced themselves with a password, “I’m from 802,” the musicians’
union which Helbock supported.” Once his customer-players began to jam
regularly, Helbock, thanks to the repeal of prohibition, transformed the Onyx
into Fifty-second Street’s first jazz club.*° Hammond believed in the talent of
his friends, and under his guidance Goodman attracted the talents of many of the
best jazz performers of his era, black and white. In 1934 Goodman organized
his first big band, a twelve-piece ensemble, and at Hammond’s urging engaged
ex-Ellington collaborator, Fletcher Henderson, as his arranger.

For the big dance bands of the 1930s, a “driving unaccented 4/4 that
maintained a steady pulse against varied melodic accents,” provided the
rhythmic essence of swing.*! In Goodman’s case, however, the music owed
its special drive to the tension between the beat and the tendency of Goodman
to play just before the beat.*2 Compared with the jazz bands of the 1920s,
swing bands played more rhythmic figures, leaving short bursts of the melody
to soloists whose phrases contrasted with the riffs of the reed and horn sections,
which in turn passed the tune’s motifs back and forth between them.*? By and
large, the swing bands emphasized the value and sound of the whole at the
expense of the virtuosity and spontaneity of the soloist. For the young musicians
of the 1930s, however, the rigid organization and structure of the swing bands
became suffocating. Many found the freedom they sought by moving from band
to band, serving as itinerant musicians as the mood or the city suited them.
Others found emotional and artistic satisfaction by playing informally for each
other in after-hours clubs, hotel rooms, or even on the roofs of tenements.

As the “King of Swing,” Goodman had embraced swing in 1934 at
Hammond’s urging, and began a long recording career with Columbia. Thanks
to Henderson’s reworking of jazz standards and contemporary popular tunes,
Goodman established a firm musical identity. In July 1935 he invited Teddy
Wilson to form a trio with himself and drummer Gene Krupa. The Benny
Goodman Trio, the first integrated jazz group of the century, played fine,
chamber-inspired jazz, recording an especially well-received “After You’ve
Gone” in a July 1935 session. Goodman expanded the trio to a quartet with
the addition of a second black musician, Lionel Hampton, with whom the
group recorded “Moonglow” in August 1936. At the same time his big band
acquired national fame thanks to several film appearances and a series of radio
broadcasts. By 1938 Goodman had achieved unparalleled status as a popular
musical star and became the idol of legions of adoring teenage fans.

Goodman’s popularity reached its apex with his famous concert at
Carnegie Hall on January 16, 1938. Goodman, who played, so to speak, at his
own coronation, “rocked the hall,” while his exuberant fans danced as if the
aisles they appropriated belonged to the Paramount. “Swing today,” the Times
proclaimed, “is the most widespread artistic medium of popular emotional
expression.”°4 Again, at Hammond’s urging, Goodman invited Count Basie
and five members of his band to join the concert toward the end of the session.

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 10 ---
PETER RUTKOFF and WILLIAM SCOTT 99
Together the two groups jammed an extended version of “Honeysuckle Rose,”
providing many in the Carnegie Hall audience with their first extended exposure
to Basie and, perhaps, to his form of black jazz. The spontaneity of the jam
session provided one of the emotional and musical, and for Hammond, social
highlights of the evening when Goodman drummer, Gene Krupa, joined the
Basie rhythm section for the rest of the historic occasion.

Late that evening members of Goodman’s band went to the Savoy in
Harlem where they watched Chick Webb’s band engage Count Basie in a
cutting contest that lasted through the night. News of the bands’ contest spread
throughout Harlem, forcing the Savoy to turn away an estimated twenty-five
thousand fans. Late that morning Webb outdrummed Krupa, still playing with
Basie, to the pleasure of those lucky enough to get inside, while the rest of
Goodman’s musicians jammed in their hotel room as the sun rose.”

A year later Hammond himself commandeered Carnegie Hall for a concert
“From Spirituals to Swing” that demonstrated the role of African-Americans in
the history of jazz.°° Hammond unsuccessfully approached first the NAACP,
which found his concept too daring, and then the International Ladies’ Garment
Workers Union to sponsor the concert. Finally, Hammond convinced Eric
Bernay, a financial backer of the New Masses, to fund the program, booking
Carnegie Hall for December 23, 1938. Hammond spent the summer lining
up his performers, finding folk-blues singer Sonny Terry, fashioning a Benny
Goodman sextet with a very young and innovative electric guitarist, Charlie
Christian, and engaging the Kansas City Six, a segment of the Basie band that
featured saxophonist Lester Young.’

Hammond had heard Basie as early as 1932 at Covan’s when the young
pianist played for the Kansas City band of Benny Moten. Covan’s had been
one of the first Harlem jazz spots that Hammond visited, an experience he
owed to muralist/painter Charles Alston. By 1935 Basie assumed leadership of
Moten’s band, and Hammond, constantly on the lookout for new talent in the
Midwest and Southwest, heard Basie, then playing at the Reno Club in Kansas
City, over his car radio. Hammond called MCA’s Willard Alexander in New
York, arranged for the two of them to fly to Kansas City, where Alexander
signed Basie on the spot. Hammond then set up a recording date in Chicago
and a headliner engagement at the Roseland Ballroom in New York.** Under
Hammond’s guidance Basie reshaped his quintessentially Kansas City blues-
based band into one of the three major black jazz bands of his time, gaining
initial national recognition with the 1937 classic “One O’Clock Jump.”°?

The Basie band, which featured Lester Young on saxophone, rivaled
Goodman’s in commercial appeal. By the late 1930s, however, no one in jazz
rivaled Young. By his twentieth birthday in 1929, the young tenor saxophonist,
then with King Oliver’s band, had already developed a highly individual,
harmonically advanced style of playing. Yet, as the most influential artist
between Armstrong and Parker, Lester Young remained an introspective and
fundamentally private person.”

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 11 ---
100 THE KENYON REVIEW

As a teenager Young played the drums and the alto sax before switching
to the clarinet and then tenor sax, which he played in a range which embraced
the sonority of the alto. Young spent his twenties moving, itinerantly, from
town to town throughout the Midwest and Southwest. Electric guitarist Charlie
Christian, who played with Young at the “Spirituals to Swing” concert in 1938,
first heard Lester in Oklahoma City in 1929 and again in 1931 with Walter
Page’s Blue Devils. Christian, still in his teens, found that Young’s narrative
style of playing, in contrast to Coleman Hawkins’s technical flights of fancy,
would have a lasting effect on his own development.*!

On at least two occasions, once in 1933 and again in 1939, Young
and Hawkins met in classic confrontation. The first preceded Hawkins’s five-
year European sojourn, while the second occurred within weeks following his
return, when he supposedly said after surveying the tenor scene, “I didn’t
hear a thing that was new.”4? The 1933 Kansas City jam lasted through the
middle of the next day, a testament to the rivalry’s intensity. Hawkins’s play
that night combined his “large” vibrato sound with the speed of pushed up
eighth notes, creating his signature hot sound. The contrast with Young, whose
smooth vibrato-less tone—he employed alternative fingerings to soften his
timbre—could not have been more clear.*?

For the next two years Young played for Basie in Kansas City, and arrived
with the Count in New York in 1937. Young did not conform to the stereotype
of a swaggering, aggressive, black jazz musician. Indeed, his very nature—shy,
introverted, laconic—ran against the grain of that image, and his personality
permeated his musical aesthetic. Lester Young loved subtle and shaded language
in music and words. His gentle manner combined with a sly sense of humor
and command of language, which he later grafted to a musician’s life.

Young, who called all women “Lady” out of gallantry and genuine
gentility, conferred the proudly worn “Lady Day” on Billie Holiday. She recip-
rocated by calling him “Prez,” an affectionate contraction of “The President,”
Young’s democratic handle awarded in recognition of his first confrontation
with Hawkins. His private code extended beyond Holiday. “Where’s your
poundcake?” he asked fellow musicians, inquiring about their wives. And if he
peppered his everyday speech with the vernacular of barrooms and gin mills, he
preferred to refer to sexual intercourse as “wearing a hat.”“* He only exercised
any semblance of control over the band, however, when he pitched for Basie
in softball games held against players in the Goodman and Harry James bands.

One evening shortly after his arrival in New York, Young accompanied
Hammond and Basie to Clark Monroe’s Uptown House in Harlem where
Holiday had just begun a three-month “residency.” Although Basie already
had a blues singer in Jimmy Rushing, he immediately signed Holiday. While
Holiday never recorded with Basie, the experience led to an extraordinarily
close artistic and personal friendship with Young. “Lady Day” and “Prez”
shared the blues and a sense of narrative. For each of them the story to be told
had artistic precedence, and the blues, in essence, told stories. Young often

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 12 ---
PETER RUTKOFF and WILLIAM SCOTT IOI
referred to the necessity of musicians understanding the words of the songs
they played so that they could improvise expressively on their meaning. In the
Southwest blues tradition Young embraced a linear form of playing — derivative
of the folk vernacular and narrative expression.*© Young’s solos displayed an
extraordinary smoothness, the consequence of his own tendency to compress
his range, as he slid from note to note. Young’s style led to his breaking the
boundaries of swing-band jazz. The division of songs into segments of four bars
cramped Young’s need to express himself. His pursuit of blues-based narratives
also led him to explore innovative harmonic and rhythmic ideas.*” Like many
of his Kansas City jazz colleagues, Young often hung back behind the beat ever
so slightly, barely slowing the rhythm. creating a tension between soloist and
ensemble, emphasizing the smoothness of his own exposition, whose “gentle
cats-paw way of moving” he punctuated with open spaces of paused silence.”®
Young’s innovations, concealed within a musical system of which he remained
an integral part, obscured his role in the evolution of jazz from swing to bebop.
Young’s elegant aesthetic prepared the way for the more dramatic changes that
lay ahead.

As long as the format and form of the swing orchestra held sway over the
jazz world in the 1930s, the expressiveness of Young and Holiday remained
submerged behind the identity of group and leader. Hammond’s “Spirituals
to Swing” concert of 1938 challenged these structural assumptions as well as
those of racial segregation. The popularity of the small ensemble, the combos of
quartets, sextets, and trios that emerged as jazz staples in the next decade, owed
their size equally to the vision of Hammond—musically and socially —as well
as to the proliferation of small dives modeled after the Onyx on Fifty-second
Street. The Kansas City Six, featuring Lester Young, with its two electric guitars
and absence of piano, made it a prototype of the emerging small jazz ensemble.
Innovative promoters could fashion new jazz clubs whose intimate settings lent
themselves to new forms of expression. The most influential was Café Society.

“Café Society,” recalled Sir Charles Thompson (so dubbed by Young),
“was the most high class club in the world.”4? Owned and managed by thirty-
six-year-old Trenton, New Jersey, show manufacturer Barney Josephson, Café
Society became the city’s first integrated night club. “The wrong place for
the right people,” Josephson once said.°? With Hammond serving as unofficial
musical director, the club on Sheridan Square in the Village, presented “first
rate but generally unknown Negro and white talent.” Lester Young thought Café
Society a perfect jazz environment. Nothing of the dive or joint characterized
Café Society. Josephson meticulously oversaw the installation and working of
light, sound, and stage equipment. Josephson and Hammond wanted a leftist,
popular-front ambience at Café Society. When Hammond suggested Billie
Holiday for the club’s opening, Josephson readily agreed.

Holiday’s unformed social and political attitudes, the result in part of
a meager formal education which ended in the fifth grade, had not kept her
from declaring, “I’m a race woman.” Neither did it equip her to deal with the

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 13 ---
102 THE KENYON REVIEW
full implications of her appearance at the club.*' Her stint with Artie Shaw
had convinced Billie that her future lay in solo performing. Mass audiences
preferred the big band singer; Café Society seemed made for her. When poet-
songwriter Lewis Allen presented Holiday with his evocative poem “Strange
Fruit,” which he had set to music, she hesitated. Compared with several other
musicians such as Frankie Newton, a trumpet player who often discoursed on
the value of Garveyite economics or the viability of the Soviet Five-Year Plan,
Billie Holiday knew music far better than she understood politics. Nevertheless,
she soon agreed to record “Strange Fruit,” its lyric about lynching, its blues
closer to a dirge than a shout. Holiday sang straightforwardly, a narrative
understatement which underscored the song’s content:

Blood on leaves, and blood at the root,

Black bodies swingin’ in the Southern breeze,

Strange Fruit hanging from the poplar trees.

Café Society and “Strange Fruit” made Billie Holiday a star—of New
York’s liberal, intellectual, New Deal left, and diverted her career from the
path she had taken from the age of sixteen. Once a saloon singer of love
songs, Holiday had become an artist whose deepening addiction to drugs
accelerated her isolation. The song’s political appeal reinforced Holiday’s
legend. Recorded on an obscure label, it received little radio play in America,
and in England the BBC banned it entirely? Hammond believed “Strange
Fruit” the worst thing that ever happened to Billie Holiday—it brought her
modest fame and little fortune.°? Lena Horne followed Holiday into Café
Society, remaining for two years as Josephson presided over the club’s
L-shaped basement room with gracious directness. When patrons voiced
discomfort over Café Society’s integrated seating, Josephson simply asked
them to leave—immediately. Between 1939 and 1950 Café Society hosted,
downtown, the great jazz voices of the era: Sarah Vaughan, Teddy Wilson, Art
Tatum, and Fletcher Henderson in addition to Holiday and Horne.

In 1939 pianist Mary Lou Williams told Hammond about a guitar player
she knew back in Oklahoma.™ In bringing Charlie Christian to New York with
Goodman later that year, Hammond unwittingly set in motion the sequence of
events that led to the emergence of bebop. Ever adventurous, Hammond found
Christian playing at the Cafe Ritz in Oklahoma City and brought the young
electric guitar player with him to meet Goodman in Beverly Hills. Goodman
looked at Christian, dressed in pointed yellow shoes, green suit, and purple shirt,
and reluctantly agreed to humor Hammond.» He assembled some musicians
and asked them to play “Rose Room,” a tune with which he assumed Christian
had no experience—hardly an uncommon practice among musicians. For forty-
five minutes Christian played chorus after improvised chorus, and Goodman
signed him to play with the sextet on the spot.°°

Under Hammond’s guidance Teddy Wilson and Lionel Hampton had
integrated Goodman’s groups several years earlier. But Christian brought to

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 14 ---
PETER RUTKOFF and WILLIAM SCOTT 103
Goodman and New York the black, aesthetic, harmonic, and blues influence
that characterized the music of Lester Young and provided the apprenticeship
of yet another player from Kansas City and the Southwest, Charlie Parker.
Christian, then Parker, and finally a small handful of other pioneering jazz
musicians, turned jazz on its head, and from the after-hours clubs of Harlem
transformed American music.
The Birth of Bop

Charlie Christian provided the transition, as no other player of his
generation, from the large, white, swing dance band orchestras of the 1930s
to the small, chamber-club, largely black dominated jazz groups of the 1940s.
For the first time in its seventy-five year history jazz no longer migrated to
New York. Now the city, its musicians, patrons, clubs, unions and bars, and
neighborhoods provided the setting for a new jazz form, bebop, to come to
the fore. Like abstract expressionism, whose full development it anticipated
by several years, bop’s six-year progression toward a unified musical whole
exemplified by Parker’s “Ko-Ko” in 1945 occurred largely in seclusion,
capturing the attention of its audience only at the end of the war. By that time
one of its pioneers, Charlie Christian, had already been dead for three years.

Christian, born in either 1916 or 1919, died of tuberculosis in 1942. He
spent the last year of his life largely in Harlem where he played and jammed
at Minton’s and Monroe’s, where young musicians came to experiment, to
break away from the music and the structures of their elders. Here, during
World War II, Christian and the early beboppers institutionalized the informal
jazz culture of the Southwest, of Kansas City, Oklahoma City, and the tank
towns in-between. Christian and then Parker brought that culture, along with
the influence of Lester Young, with them to New York and turned it into bebop.

Christian encountered Young in Oklahoma City in the 1920s as did Ralph
Ellison, who wrote, “I first heard Lester Young at Halley Richardson’s shoe-
shine parlor in Oklahoma City jamming in the shine chair, his feet working
the footrests.”>” There, Ellison recalled, “most of the respectable Negroes”
considered jazz a low-class form of music, and they educated their children in
the niceties of marching band music. Life in Oklahoma City, where Christian
guided his blind father, who played guitar in the white sections of town,
exposed Christian to the guitar and blues tradition of the region as well as to
the light classics with which they serenaded their patrons.*® Young’s influence
in the late twenties and early thirties extended Christian’s education. He later
translated Young’s technique to the electric guitar, an instrument he began to
play seriously in 1937, only two years before encountering Hammond.°?

Oklahoma born, Kansas City educated, Christian came to New York
playing an instrument that had barely existed a decade earlier. Along with
French-Belgian guitarist Django Reinhardt, he transformed the electric guitar

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 15 ---
104 THE KENYON REVIEW

from a rhythm to a solo voice. The “riff-tune” idea, derived largely from the
Kansas City school of jazz that he adapted from Young, worked perfectly with
Christian’s technical innovations. Abandoning the chorded rhythm style of play-
ing, Christian strung together lines of singly picked notes, producing smoothly
improvised riffs, whose shape rose and fell with almost classic symmetry.

The riff style of Kansas City jazz, the short rhythmic phrases which bands
like Basie’s used—and which they said “always carried a melody you could
write a song from”—provided one of the features of Christian’s music. The
other, an innovation where the rhythm section stressed all four beats rather than
the accented second and fourth, gave the music its swing. Christian took this
musical heritage and expanded it, continuing to play in a blues tradition but
increasing the improvisational richness of his expression.*!

Christian’s rich vein of improvisational materials constantly amazed the
Harlem aficionados who crowded into Minton’s. He took great pleasure in
dissecting popular songs whose chord progressions he found challenging and
then building his improvisational line anew on the structure he had uncovered.
At times he lifted other musicians’ favorite riffs and quoted them in the
middle of his own line.® An artist talking to other artists, Christian assumed
that his colleagues and audience knew the book. His innovations, playing the
upper notes of a chord, the ninths and elevenths, substituting diminished for
dominant sevenths, and temporarily abandoning syncopation, all anticipated the
internal musical changes that bebop would expand. Christian also phrased in
odd, ill-fitting lengths, three-and-a-half or five bars, stretching the structural
assumptions which governed the standard thirty-two bar format that jazz
retained from popular music.® Christian’s innovative musicianship enabled
him to extract all the “juices out of his blues background.”

Christian’s death in his mid-twenties deprived modern jazz of one of its
foremost experimental musicians. But Charlie Christian shared his ideas with a
handful of contemporary innovators: Parker, Gillespie, drummer Kenny Clarke,
and pianist Thelonious Monk. Together, in the small after-hours clubs of Harlem
and then Fifty-second Street, they created bebop. The clubs that nurtured the
bebop generation all began as illegal speakeasies, owned by a variety of black
and white gamblers and bookmakers, bootleggers, and gangsters, who gradually
transformed their chili parlors and juke joints into legitimate businesses. Henry
Minton, the owner of the restaurant bar on 118th Street and St. Nicholas
Avenue, started his place as a supper club called Minton’s Playhouse, to serve
both the local neighborhood and the Sugar Hill crowd.®© Minton, the first black
delegate to the American Federation of Musicians Local 802, charged two
dollars as cover, and prided himself on the food he and his staff served up
at night. Ellison recalled that Minton “created generous portions of Negro-
American cuisine—the hash, grits, fried chicken, the ham-seasoned vegetables,
the hot biscuits and rolls.” On Monday nights he provided “free whiskey” for
the musicians who had performed at the Apollo. The Monday night spreads
served as a springboard for the legendary happenings at his club between 1940

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 16 ---
PETER RUTKOFF and WILLIAM SCOTT 105
and 1944. They also circumvented union regulations which prohibited jam
sessions in New York. Minton’s position as delegate exempted him from the
ban.”

Minton’s club invited company. He flanked his dining room in front by
a bar, where during the day local patrons played the juke box and danced,
and in back by the cabaret bandstand, so small that a dozen players made it
feel like rush hour on the subway rumbling below. When he turned the club
over to band leader Teddy Hill in 1940, Minton’s became an ideal place for
New York’s experimental jazz musicians. Hill extended the Monday evening
welcome jam sessions by forming a house band for the usual good food/no
pay policy. Hill’s personnel in the early 1940s included drummer Kenny Clarke
and pianist Thelonious Monk. Dizzy Gillespie, who had first played with Hill
in 1937, joined them whenever he appeared in New York, as did Parker.

When Minton’s closed each morning, Kenny Clarke recalled, “We'd all
head for Monroe’s” to continue the night’s playing and talking.©® Located on
West 134th Street, Clark Monroe’s Uptown House lacked Minton’s food and
elegance but served as a nightly hangout for musicians looking for action. A
true after-hours club, Monroe’s presented a floor show and featured a house
band that allowed guest musicians to sit in. At the 6:00 A.M. closing time, the
jazz players passed the hat. On a good night a share of the take might approach
the seven dollars a week that the nearby Collins’ rooming house charged for
room and board.” Or it might buy the next day’s heroin.

During the war Monroe’s and Minton’s became legendary Harlem after-
hours places. But the neighborhood contained dozens of jazz bars where young
musicians hung out and experimented with the new music. They served as
stations, offering musicians a place to rest on their journey.’! Minton’s (or
Monroe’s or even Dan Wall’s Chili House on Seventh and 140th), wrote Ellison,
“as a nightclub in a Negro community ... was part of a national pattern.” Each
re-created the atmosphere of a Kansas City jam session, “but with new blowing
tunes.”7”

Charlie Parker, the central figure in the bebop revolution, had worked
in and out of New York since 1938. Constantly at odds with the pressure to
entertain, Parker washed dishes and played the alto saxophone at Wall’s in
December 1939. “I was working over ‘Cherokee,’ and, as I did, I found that by
using the higher intervals of a chord as a melody line and backing them with
appropriately related changes, I could play the thing I’d been hearing. I came
alive.”’? Parker’s musical epiphany, whose harmonic structure he expanded
during the next two years, resulted in two fragmentary recordings of “Cherokee”
in 1942. Parker, Gillespie, Clarke, and Monk, individually and collectively, built
on that innovation and in 1945 took it downtown, finally complete, as “Ko-Ko.”

In the mid-1930s, hanging around the bars and clubs that honeycombed
Kansas City, Charlie Parker, born in 1920 of working-class parents, first met
Lester Young. “I was crazy about Lester,” he once said, “he played so clean
and beautiful. But I wasn’t influenced.” Stylistically, the up-tempo, mature

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 17 ---
106 THE KENYON REVIEW

sound of Parker’s alto appeared far removed from Young’s smoothly beautiful
phrasing. But each had his roots in the wide-open politics. and the blues-based
music of Kansas City. Kansas City’s reputation for hot music and times was an
aspect of the machine politics of Boss Tom Pendergast, whose numbers runners
and bookmakers made the city “Depression proof.””* Kansas City’s jazz joints
became even more prosperous following the repeal of Prohibition, and they
were known across the Southwest as places for musicians to meet, to jam, to
experiment, to sit in and cut. Customers came less to dance than to listen.”

Parker left school at age fourteen when he traded his marching band tuba
for an alto saxophone and mimicked the way Young, who held his tenor up
and off to the side, played his. Married at age fifteen, fully grown physically,
Parker burned with a desire to excel. On a memorable evening in the summer of
1936 Young encouraged Parker to sit in. The session resulted in Parker’s public
humiliation when drummer Jo Jones crashed his cymbal at Parker’s because he
could not keep pace with the band.’6 Parker licked his wounds and reportedly
muttered to Jones, “I’ll be back.””” Within a year he had mastered the scales
and blues runs of all twelve keys, experimenting with idiosyncratic fingering,
cutting his own reeds, and moving from one set of chord patterns, or changes,
to the next, in the middle of a solo.”® Kansas City jazz, which relied more on
improvised solos than on orchestrated arrangements, fostered experimentation
which superimposed the harmonically compatible riffs of one tune on another.”
This kind of harmonically inventive quotation depended on the musician’s
ability to retain and play hundreds of blues riffs. Parker possessed the uncanny
ability to imagine the possibilities of a tune and then explore its variety, drawing
on the rich blues tradition he had internalized.° Between 1936 and 1939 Parker
spent an estimated fifteen thousand hours “woodshedding” —an apprenticeship
honed in the dance halls, bars, grills, and chili houses of Kansas City. Parker
lacked only a formal, theoretical system with which to consolidate his intuitive
innovations.

In the fall of 1938, shortly after his arrival in New York, Parker first met
Dizzy Gillespie, then with Cab Calloway’s band. A year later Gillespie, who did
not remember the earlier introduction, returned to Kansas City where Calloway
performed at a theater which permitted blacks to sit only in a segregated
balcony, a “buzzards” roost.” Told by a fellow trumpet player that he had to
meet a new alto player, Gillespie went to the musicians’ local, sat down at the
piano, and “Charlie Parker played. I never heard anything like that before.”®!

In 1940 Parker landed a job with Kansas City band leader Jay McShann.
McShann’s band, a local successor to Basie, kept the twenty-year-old Parker in
the Southwest for most of the next year and a half, Parker’s longest sustained
stint with a single group. With McShann, Parker mastered the swing band book,
playing by the rules. Then, in January 1942, weeks after Pearl Harbor forced
Minton’s to abandon its Monday evening spreads as excessive, McShann, with
Parker in attendance, opened at the Savoy, sharing the bandstand with Lucky
Millinder, whose band now featured Dizzy Gillespie.*”

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 18 ---
PETER RUTKOFF and WILLIAM SCOTT 107

Three years older than Parker, John Berks Gillespie, born in Cheraw,
South Carolina, learned to play the trumpet at a Negro industrial school, the
Laurinberg Institute in North Carolina, where he learned music theory and
harmony. In 1937 he joined Teddy Hill’s band. At the age of twenty Gillespie
traveled with Hill to England, where Gillespie, “trying my best to sound like
Roy Eldridge,” found himself relegated to third trumpet chair. On his return
Gillespie, while waiting for his 802 union card, scrambled for work, playing
gigs for Communist party dances in Brooklyn and the Bronx.*? He met Apollo
dancer Lorraine Willis, earned seventy dollars a week working with Hill,
and settled into family life. Gillespie’s hip expressiveness provided the new
generation of jazz musicians with a model of comportment, just as the special
glint in Gillespie’s eyes captured his spirit of devilish rebellion.*4

Gillespie’s two closest musical collaborators, bassist Milt Hinton and
drummer Kenny Clarke, found Dizzy irrepressible. Hinton, with whom Gilles-
pie played in the Cab Calloway band for several years, remembered that Dizzy
quickly picked up the band’s particular brand of slang, derived from Ben
Webster, whose linguistic inventions equaled those of Lester Young. Together,
“The Judge” —Hinton’s name derived from a joke he told regularly—and Diz
spoke of “cows” (hundred dollars), “lines” (fifty), “softs” (chicks), and “pin”
(dig), which enabled them to say elliptically, “pin that soft.” To Hinton, the
argot of the jazz musician simply extended the linguistic ingenuity “of all of
black society.”®

Dizzy’s harmonic sophistication seemed years ahead of the rest of the
musicians in Calloway’s band, and Hinton encouraged Gillespie’s experimen-
tation. Often the two would drag Hinton’s bass up the back staircase to the
roof of the Apollo, the Cotton Club, or the apartment building where Dizzy
lived to try out some of the changes, the chord progressions, that Gillespie
wanted to insert into the music they played for Calloway. When Hinton could
not follow the complex harmonic systems, Gillespie shouted the chords out
to him.®° Gillespie recalled, with evident excitement encountering a “weird”
change, “an E flat chord built on an A, the flatted fifth ... Qooooman! I played
the thing over and over again.... I found that there were a lot of pretty voices
in a chord.”®”

From time to time Hinton and Gillespie slipped their arrangements into
the band’s performance, and Calloway, thinking something had gone awry,
would stop and say, “I don’t want you playing that Chinese music in my
band.”®8 In September 1941, with Hinton and Gillespie doing their music,
Hinton missed one of the changes they had practiced together— “Diz signaled
“you stink’ with his hand and sent a spitball my way.” Calloway thought the
ever flamboyant Gillespie had intended the missile for him. Gillespie said,
“Fes, I didn’t do that.” Calloway refused Gillespie’s explanation and slapped
him. When Gillespie drew a knife, Hinton stepped between the two, deflecting
the blade. As Calloway grabbed at him, Gillespie, to his horror, saw the knife
plunge into the band leader’s leg, superficially wounding Calloway, staining

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 19 ---
108 THE KENYON REVIEW

his trademark white tuxedo trousers bright red. Calloway, wounded in body
and pride, fired Gillespie on the spot, and when Dizzy later tried to apologize
“Cab just walked away.”®? Sometime later, reflecting on the fact than many
musicians carried weapons, trumpeter Roy Eldridge said, “Baby, if you go
down South, or even just here in New York after an extra-late gig... then you
gotta have something.””?

Throughout the early 1940s Gillespie’s musical prowess grew. He played
with Earl Hines, alongside Parker in 1942-43, and with Billy Eckstine in
1944. Yet, swing bands played commercially successful music that bore little
resemblance to the jazz that Gillespie and other nascent beboppers played at
Minton’s and Monroe’s. Kenny Clarke explained, “We had no name for the
music. We called ourselves modern.”®! Like many of the other pioneers of
modern jazz who congregated at Minton’s and Monroe’s, Clarke grew up in a
musical family. His father played the trombone, and Clarke studied music in
high school, mastering several instruments and learning theory. He first played
for a local group before joining an East St. Louis band in 1934 that featured
Charlie Christian.°? Three years later Clarke, an extremely independent young
player, moved to New York. He resented the humiliation of performing in a
racially prejudiced society which forced him to accept inferior accommodations
and working conditions. Living in Harlem only reinforced his feistiness, and
for the next several years Clarke was hired and fired by Count Basie and
Louis Armstrong. He traveled and played in Europe for eight months in 1938,
and finally found a place with Teddy Hill’s band, where he met and played
with Gillespie. When Hill moved to Minton’s, he installed Clarke as the house
drummer.

Many Harlem nightclubs, like the Savoy, frequently required one fast
dance number after the other, and Clarke found that the unrelenting double-
time pace of these “flag wavers” wore him out. When swing drummers assumed
the role of timekeeper, they did so primarily through the right-foot-driven bass
drum. Clarke sought a rhythmic alternative to the repetitive, tiring, and boring
pounding of eight beats to the measure.”? Already experimenting with jumping
in on the open beat, and dreaming of liberating the drummer to become an
accompanist as well as a rhythmic anchor, Clarke shifted the responsibility of
keeping time from the bass drum to the right-hand cymbal. Other rhythmic
variations followed. Musicians complained that they no longer had a clear
sense of the rhythm. “Depend on yourself,’ Clarke responded, “because if
you’re playing music, the tempo that you’re playing is in your head.”

Clarke freed band musicians to follow their own rhythmic variations.
But not until Clarke played with Gillespie, however, did he find a musician
who appreciated the opportunity his rhythmic innovations had created. By
transferring keeping time to the right hand, Clarke also liberated the bass drum
to provide off-beat accents, or what he and his friends called “bombs” or
“klook-mops.” With this reversal Clarke released his left foot to play the high
hat and his left hand, which many drummers ignored except as an afterthought,

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 20 ---
PETER RUTKOFF and WILLIAM SCOTT 10g
to work on the snare. In diminishing the timekeeping role of the drummer,
Clarke expanded the polyrhythmic and instrumental possibilities of the entire
jazz ensemble.

Hill did not think Clarke’s innovations worked for a swing dance
band and fired him. Yet, as soon as Hill took over Minton’s with plans
to make it a musicians’ hangout, he rehired Clarke saying, “You play all
the re-bop and boom-bams you want.” Dizzy understood immediately.
Clarke’s work on the cymbal fit wonderfully with the trumpet as well as
with Gillespie’s rhythmic adventurousness. When he perfected his technique,
Clarke remembered thinking, “Well, it worked.”*° Gillespie mastered Clarke’s
multirhythmic drum innovations sufficiently to teach other musicians after
Clarke joined the armed forces in 1943. Similarly, Gillespie’s passion for the
new music led him to the elbow of Minton’s resident pianist, Thelonious Monk,
whose cryptic and oblique personality and far-out ideas about chromaticism,
guided and reflected his skills as composer and performer. Gillespie credited
Monk with showing him the oddly chorded configurations that inspired not just
Gillespie’s harmonic experimentation, but served as the foundation for Monk’s
bop anthem “Round Midnight.”

Thelonious Sphere Monk lived for most of his life in a spare apartment on
West Sixty-third Street in the San Juan Hill neighborhood. Monk, born in North
Carolina, came to New York in 1922. He started playing the piano at the age of
six, apparently learning his way around the instrument by himself sufficiently
to give lessons to neighborhood kids for seventy-five cents an hour, to perform
at local rent parties, and to win an amateur night contest at the Apollo in
the mid-1930s.” Playing stride piano in the style of Willie “The Lion” Smith,
Monk joined an itinerant faith-healer’s band (“She prayed, we played,” he once
stated) and returned to New York at age seventeen, accomplished but hardly
flush. Scuffing for any work, non-union jobs that paid twenty dollars a week,
Monk specialized in gigs whose contracts could be broken in a minute’s notice.

Monk spread his unusually small fingers flat, not arched, when he played.
He cultivated a non-technique, one which later incorporated his elbow or
forearm, to complement his theoretical explorations as part of his search for
chromatic alternatives to traditional harmonic structure. Refusing to draw any
distinction between life and art, Monk played the piano wherever and whenever
he could, eating and sleeping irregularly, depending for financial stability on
his wife Nellie, who called him “Melodious Thunk.””

Years later, performing with John Coltrane, Monk began a set with his
own solo. When someone yelled from the back, “We wanna hear Coltrane,”
Monk responded, “Coltrane bust up his horn.” Failing to satisfy the disgruntled
customer, Monk extemporized, “Mr. Coltrane plays a wind instrument. The
sound is produced by blowing into it and opening different holes to let air out.
Over some of these holes is a felt air pad. One of Mr. Coltrane’s felt pads has
fallen off, and in order for him to get the sound he wants, so that we can make
better music for you, he is in the back making a new one. You dig?”

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 21 ---
110 THE KENYON REVIEW

Monk could be equally direct, though usually less sarcastic with his
colleagues. He and Clarke together composed an extraordinary bop tune,
“Epistrophe,” and Clarke recalled, “I was hung up on the last two bars. I
couldn’t figure it out, what chords would be best.... I showed it to Monk.”
Monk looked at the sheet for a moment, sat down at the piano and played the
two missing bars, and said, “There it is.”!®

During Monk’s tenure at Minton’s a young student at Columbia Uni-
versity, Jerry Newman, a jazz enthusiast and amateur recorder, occasionally
performed at the informal floor shows that Hill organized. Newman apparently
lip-synched the words of celebrities, from FDR to Bob Hope, which he
had recorded from the radio. For compensation Hill allowed Newman to
set up primitive equipment to record the jazz sessions. With the cabaret
stage flanked on either side by the “Gents” and “Ladies” rest rooms, the
historic Newman recordings from 1941 and 1942, released in the early 1950s,
frequently registered the sounds of slamming doors. Newman told Down Beat
writer George Hoeffer that Monk played brilliantly at Minton’s, working his
compositions seated at the piano, over and over again, developing a succession
of new ideas, pushing the limits of his composition.'°! Newman, however, cared
little for Parker’s work, and only an unexplained quirk of fate accounts for his
historic recording of Parker’s “Cherokee” at Monroe’s in the summer of 1942.

Parker had just left McShann’s band and settled in New York, making the
rounds each night, looking for gigs and drugs. One evening tenor sax player
Ben Webster asked Monroe about “that cat” Parker “blowing weird stuff.”
Monroe promised to put Parker on the next night to play “Cherokee,” which
Newman then recorded on a paper disc.'* The 1942 “Cherokee” at Monroe’s,
together with a second version that Parker recorded several weeks later with
a pick-up band in Kansas City, revealed the extent to which Bird had blown
past his fellow musicians.!%

The band opened with a two-chorus statement of the tune’s theme, a
swing statement typical of those played in a hundred cocktail lounges, while
the unknown pianist slipped in the “Tea for Two” theme that Parker would
repeat ironically in “Ko-Ko.” As Allen Tinney, one of the musicians who
played regularly at Minton’s and Monroe’s recalled, the musicians had “already
developed a “Tea for Two’ thing in the middle...and he dug this and right
away started fitting in.”!®* Parker’s solo, sudden and strong, shattered the
song’s conventional thematic statement. Not yet the howling and emotionally
intense alto player he would become, Parker took his audience’s breath away
with a display of up-tempo improvisation, a series of riffs that challenged his
band to keep pace. Pulling the band in the slip stream of his performance,
Parker negotiated the bridge, and returned the tune to the band for a final
restatement. !°

Parker played as smoothly as his mentor, Lester Young, and yet the virtual
double-time quality of the piece delivered a completely different rhythmic
effect. For if Young played ever so slightly behind the beat, holding a song

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 22 ---
PETER RUTKOFF and WILLIAM SCOTT Ill
back as if to pull out every ounce of emotional meaning, Parker remained
insistently in front, pulling the song with him, redefining it in his own terms,
making it into his music.

“Cherokee” served as more than Parker’s signature song. It became the
test for aspiring musicians in Harlem who wanted to play with Parker, Gillespie,
Monk, and Clarke. Word of Parker’s performances spread, making the late-
night sessions at Minton’s crowded affairs with as many as eighteen musicians
packed onto the small stage, each vying for attention. The jam seemed to be
getting out of hand. “Cherokee” became a way to catch the neophytes. “Because
it was moving in half steps and [in] the different keys,” the song determined
who went back to the woodshed.!

Bebop Uptown

Minton’s and Monroe’s provided a critical junction in the history of
modern jazz in New York. In the wake of the first successful effort to
integrate jazz, a movement initiated and sustained by John Hammond, a
younger generation of black musicians seized the day to reinvest jazz with
the blues. Bebop owed its slow emergence to the circumstances of its birth.
Parker, Gillespie, Clarke, and Monk each worked on both sides of musical
street. Featured members of conventional swing bands on one side and fiercely
proud insurgents on the other, they made bebop into a new form of African-
American jazz. As Ralph Ellison wrote of the bebop musicians, “They were
concerned . .. with art, not entertainment.”!®’ In musical terms Parker, Gillespie,
Monk, and Clarke transformed popular pieces into jazz through harmonic and
melodic substitution. Together, between 1942 and 1945, Gillespie and Parker
worked to complete the innovation. In 1942 after hearing the Nat King Cole
trio’s version of “How High the Moon,” Gillespie played it for Monk, who
substituted a more complex set of chord changes that freed the soloists to
expand their improvisational range. The new piece—named “Ornithology,”
punning on Parker’s shortened nickname, Bird—adhered to the harmonic
structure of the original, but no longer resembled it.!%

When Parker and Gillespie found band work, they signed on together, first
with Earl Hines then with Billy Eckstine, learning each other’s books, passing
musical ideas back and forth. Parker’s facility and intuition complemented
Gillespie’s disciplined and theoretical approach. Each played with astonishing
speed, displaying technical virtuosity that stunned even the most professionally
accomplished colleagues. Parker and Gillespie acknowledged the other’s contri-
bution to the formation of bebop. Gillespie later said of Parker, “He played fast.
He played notes others didn’t hear. He attacked.”! When not playing for Hines
or Eckstine or jamming uptown, the two worked meticulously on theoretical
exercises, experimenting with new scales and modes, fitting different chordal
relations onto old tunes, improvising, always exploring new lines of expression.

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 23 ---
112 THE KENYON REVIEW

During one session Gillespie worked at the piano improvising on chord
changes based on “a thirteenth resolving to a D minor,” and noticed an emergent
melody which he thought had a Latin feel, a special syncopation in the bass
line. The tune, a composition based on improvisational exercises, remained
untitled until band leader Earl Hines thought to call it “Night in Tunisia,”
in recognition of the North African landings in the fall of 1942.''° Gillespie
wrote, “My music emerged from the war years...fast and furious with the
chord changes going this way and that.... Sometimes when you know the
laws you can break them. But you’ve got to know it first.”!!!

Milt Hinton recounted a particularly vivid summer night at Minton’s when
Parker dropped by to talk and “really blow.” The musicians jammed all night
with the windows of the ground floor cabaret open to allow some breath of
cool air. Neighbors came by to drink out of paper cups or to complain about
the late night racket. “That was a great night. I remember the great feeling,
the freedom of just blowing.”!!?

As this small core of innovative modern jazz musicians defined them-
selves, they created a distinct body of work so personal others found it
difficult to copy. Mary Lou Williams suggested that the musicians stayed
in Harlem because they feared “that the commercial world would steal what
they had created.” Downtowners, she noticed, often came into the clubs to
scribble notations on paper napkins.'!? Monk often complained, according to
Nat Hentoff, “We’ll never get credit for what we’re doing here,” concluding
that the musicians had to “create something that they can’t steal because they
can’t play it.”!'4

“What we were doing at Minton’s,” said Gillespie proudly, “was play-
ing...creating a new dialogue among ourselves, blending our ideas into a
new style of music.” Yet, Gillespie intentionally made his music difficult,
fooling newcomers into playing in B flat while actually playing in F sharp.!!5
Similarly, Jerry Newman prided himself on being one of the few white persons
present during the Minton’s-Monroe’s sessions. (Another, Jack Kerouac, then
a football scholarship player at Columbia, often sat at the bar drinking beer.)
Johnny Carisi, an Italian-American whose successful playing met with reluctant
acceptance, believed that some at Minton’s and Monroe’s resented him, feeling
“you oafys come up here and you pick up our stuff.”!'® Caught between
their belief that the white commercial music establishment was an exploitative
system that condoned segregated recording, publishing, and performing, and the
“Tomming” attitudes of older jazz musicians, the modern jazz beboppers played
and created for each other. They developed a complex and rich subculture in
language, dress, attitude, a politics to complement their music.

Monk and Gillespie cultivated the bebop-hipster image of the mid-1940s.
In contrast with swing band performers who wore scarlet or iridescent blue
dinner jackets, beboppers adopted Gillespie’s adversarial style that included
beret, dark glasses or horn rims, cigarette holders, and wide-lapeled, tailored
suits. Parker remained the exception. Miles Davis, in 1945, wandered up and

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 24 ---
PETER RUTKOFF and WILLIAM SCOTT 113
down Fifty-second street looking for Parker when Coleman Hawkins told him
to try the Heatwave up in Harlem. “I looked around and there was Bird, looking
badder than a motherfucker. He was dressed in these baggy clothes that looked
like he had been sleeping in them for days. His face was all puffed up and his
eyes all swollen and red.”!!”

About a year earlier Mary Lou Williams ran into Monk, who could look
regal wearing sweat clothes, admiring a pair of sunglasses in a shop window
next door to the musicians’ union building on Sixth Avenue. He told her that
he planned to have a pair made and appeared several days later with “his new
glasses and, of course, a beret. He had been wearing a beret with a small piano
clip on it for years. Now he started wearing the glasses and the beret, and the
others copied him.”!!8

The boppers’ stylistic avant-gardism, which mimicked and satirized the
middle class, had its slang counterpart. Jazz musicians had always used slang,
partly for amusement, partly to identify outsiders. Gillespie’s use of what he
called “pig Latin” followed the historical pattern. In addition to the more
common term “hip” (expressed uniquely by Howard McGhee, who said of
Parker, “He hipped me to Stravinsky”), bebop musicians invented new slang
terms. “Cool” and “wig” joined “mezz,” their word for pot, which derived from
Mezz Mezzrow, who always seemed to have the best supply, and “razor,” a
draft whose chill cut into one’s back. As Gillespie put it, echoing Milt Hinton,
“As black people we just naturally spoke that way. As we played with musical
notes, bending them into new and difficult meanings that constantly changed,
we played with words.”!!°

Mose Allison, who later played with Miles Davis, described Parker as
heir to the black musical experience, an embodiment of the blues and gospel
tradition. Jay McShann said succinctly, “Bird could play anything, because
primarily, Bird was the greatest blues player in the world.”!”° When his friends
attempted to shake Parker from the effects of drugs and alcohol, they appealed
to his sense of racial and political pride. Max Roach, drumming protégé of
Kenny Clarke, who played with Parker on “Ko-Ko” and then at the Three
Deuces on Fifty-second Street where he often found Parker “shooting shit,”
told him “how much he meant to us, how much he meant to black people, how
much he meant to black music.”!?!

Parker’s gifts extended well beyond the bandstand. Like Monk, he
indulged in comic outbursts, putting on Oxonian accents, turning the old
minstrel routine of travesty inside out, informing slightly bored patrons, “Ladies
and gentlemen, the management has spared no expense this evening to bring
you the Charlie Parker quintet.”!? His sense of humor and irony, however,
barely concealed his political and racial consciousness.

Parker, along with Gillespie, Clarke, Max Roach, Milt Hinton, and Art
Tatum formed a core of musicians whose political and intellectual awareness
played an important role in their musical lives. Hinton and Clarke both recalled
that Parker spoke as passionately as he played about social and political

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 25 ---
114 THE KENYON REVIEW

issues. “He was always talking deep things about race or conditions in the
country or about music. It was such a joy to talk.”!?? Gillespie engaged Parker
in discussions about Baudelaire and radical congressional representative Vito
Marcantonio. Gillespie, who focused his anger on American racism, refused to
serve in the military, fearful of barracks conditions in the South. Knowing that
his work left him constantly on the move, Gillespie figured the draft would
never catch up. He later wrote:

We were creators in an art form which grew from universal roots and which

proved it had universal appeal.... We refused to accept racism, poverty, or

economic exploitation. But there was nothing unpatriotic about it. If America
wouldn’t honor and respect us as men, we couldn’t give a shit about America.!**

Hinton and Parker were inspired by W.E.B. Du Bois and Paul Robeson.
On the road the two often talked of Du Bois’s message to black people. When
they arrived at a new destination, “We’d get off the bus and be sure we got
to this place to hear W.E.B. Du Bois and this would be the focal point of
our conversation.”!> To Hinton and Gillespie, Paul Robeson symbolized the
social aspirations of African-Americans at a time when his reputation had been
tainted by his Communist party affiliation. Fearful of red-baiting, the politically
minded jazz performers reacted cautiously, meeting Robeson on one occasion
in Cleveland to talk about music and race relations, but keeping their distance.
Hinton and Gillespie believed that federal persecution prevented the majority of
African-Americans from listening to him.'*° The American Communist party
proved no less troublesome. Trying to woo black artists and intellectuals into
its ranks, the party played on racial-sexual stereotypes, using white women to
recruit them to meetings, anxious to “get a Teddy Wilson or a Charlie Parker.”
In the end, however, the musicians knew that jazz itself best expressed their
political values. “We played,” said Hinton. “That was the kind of militancy
that we exercised.”!?’

The tension between art and politics found its resonance in a conversation
between Gillespie and Clarke, each responding to the question, “Did the music
have anything to say to black people?” Gillespie answered with his usual
directness, “Yea, get the fuck outta the way.” Clarke, who later moved to
Europe after discovering a racially benign society when stationed in France
and Germany in 1944-45, thought bebop spoke the same message as Jackie
Robinson’s presence on the ball field. Jazz, Clarke said, “was teaching
them...there was a message in our music .... Whatever you go into, go into it
intelligently.” Several years later when Parker visited Clarke in Paris he found
him at peace with himself. In Europe, Clarke explained, a black musician could
live as an artist without the additional burden of solving the dilemma of racial
prejudice. Warned Clarke, “You’re committing suicide in the United States.”!”8

Parker’s ““Now’s the Time,” recorded at the 1945 “Ko-Ko” session, clearly
demonstrated Parker’s political awareness. Written coincident with the double-
V campaign—for victory abroad and against Jim Crow at home— in the wake

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 26 ---
PETER RUTKOFF and WILLIAM SCOTT I15
of the postponed civil rights March on Washington movement and against the
residual anger from the Harlem riots of 1943, “Now’s the Time” revealed
Parker’s political concerns: its title a call for action by and for African-
Americans at a moment when society struggled to return to pre-war business
as usual. The tune’s rather lyric introduction became in Parker’s hands a
moderately paced blues, slow enough to allow Davis to accompany Parker.
But its melody, syncopated and snappy, provided the energy for subsequent
rock and roll covering. ““Now’s the Time” was greeted by a studio filled with
admirers as an activist statement. The song complemented the musical ferocity
of “Ko-Ko,” each a counterpoint to the perspective of the other.!?? The implicit
stridency of “Now’s the Time” matched the claim of artistic independence of
“Ko-Ko” from the control of the music industry. Together they spoke to the
anger and pride of the musicians who played them.

In New York the original segregated system of recording, publishing,
and performing had been loosely enforced as long as musicians, agents, and
entrepreneurs respected the color line. In contrast, the city of New York, through
the Police Department, adopted a policy which far more severely infringed
on the livelihood and civil rights of the African-American jazz musicians.
In 1931 the city had required the licensing of all cabarets, defined by the
combination of alcohol and entertainment. In 1940, however, the NYPD took
over the licensing procedure and extended it to performers, requiring that the
musicians themselves be registered, fingerprinted, and given ID cards. The
notorious “cabaret card” could be held back from anyone deemed of bad
character, largely defined as possession of marijuana and heroin. Musicians
found themselves hostage to a bureaucracy and an enforcement agency they
knew to be fundamentally hostile, if not simply racist.

Equally oppressive was the behavior of the American Federation of
Musicians Local 802, led by James C. Petrillo. The 802 leadership viewed the
jazz musicians as “deviant and racially inferior.”!°° In 1942 Petrillo ordered a
recording ban, in effect a strike by union members against all studios, which
had devastating effects on black jazz musicians. The union hoped to salvage
the losses of hundreds of live radio jobs to recordings by pressuring the record
companies to pay royalties to a musicians’ trust fund for every side played on
radio or over jukeboxes. To black jazz musicians, who depended on sales from
the small labels that concentrated on jazz, the ban spelled financial disaster.
Popular white swing bands, who enjoyed contracts with large record companies,
had sufficient backlogs to release previously recorded music for the duration
of the strike, which lasted until 1944. While Petrillo’s ban had not sought
to prevent the new jazz from being recorded, it had that effect. The union
organized its delegates to circulate through the city to assure compliance and
to prevent illegal jams. Only Henry Minton’s office in the union enabled his
club to remain exempt from the ban.!?!

The recording ban of 1942-44 had a dual effect. It seriously restricted the
ability of the musicians to make a living playing a non-commercialized, esoteric
This content downloaded from

128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 27 ---
116 THE KENYON REVIEW

jazz. Yet, it drove the musicians underground, liberating them from commercial
constraint. When the union lifted the ban in 1944, bebop had matured. What
bebop’s new listeners heard after two years of silence seemed startlingly new.
The general public continued to dance to the big band swing of Benny Goodman
and Glenn Miller, but bebop, “the underground was years ahead.”!3?

Bebop, created by a small group of black musicians who migrated to
the city during the Depression, anticipating the massive movement of the
second great migration during the war, created an expressive and technically
complex music that belonged to them. During the war they worked out a
new set of conventions that shaped jazz in its many variations for the next
generation. By restoring the role of blues-based improvisation, these modern
jazz revolutionaries insisted on receiving cultural as well as financial credit for
their music. When Parker, Gillespie, Davis, Roach, and Russell recorded “Ko-
Ko” in the late fall of 1945, they stepped out of obscurity into the spotlight of
public notice. With the end of the war the time had come to take their music
downtown, to unfurl its banner on The Street.

NOTES

'Jack Chambers, Milestones 1: The Music and Times of Miles Davis to 1960 (New York:
U of Toronto P, 1983) 36.

James Patrick, “Charlie Parker and Harmonic Sources of Bebop Composition: Thoughts
on the Repertory of New Jazz in the 1940s,” Journal of Jazz Studies 6.1 (1979): 12.

3“The Charlie Parker Story,” Savoy, MG-12079, bands 14 and 15. Billed by Savoy as
“The Greatest Recording Session in Modern Jazz in Its Entirety,” the out-of-print record has been
rereleased in CD format.

4James Patrick, “The Ko-Ko Session,” Journal of Jazz Studies 8.2 (1981): 78-81.

>Lawrence Koch, Yardbird Suite, A Compendium of the Music and Life of Charlie Parker
(Bowling Green: Bowling Green UP, 1988) 67.

6Dizzy Gillespie, with Al Frazer, To Be or Not to...Bop: Memoirs (New York: Doubleday,
1979) 233.

7Koch 68.

8Ira Gitler, Jazz Masters of the Forties (New York: Da Capo, 1966) 27.

°Max Harrison, “Jazz,” The New Grove Gospel, Blues, and Jazz (New York: Norton, 1980)
294. Says Harrison, “the piece could almost be described as a pesto lamentoso.”

'OMiles Davis, with Quincy Troupe, Miles, the Autobiography (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1989) 75.

"Gillespie 231.

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 28 ---
PETER RUTKOFF and WILLIAM SCOTT 117

'2Gillespie 210.

'3Gillespie 299.

'4Gillespie 299.

'SJames Lincoln Collier, Duke Ellington (New York: Macmillan, 1987) 225.

'6Koch 68.

"Patrick 16.

'8Ross Russell, Bird Lives! The High Life and Hard Times of Charlie Parker (New York:
Norton, 1973) 14.

‘Lawrence Levine, “Jazz and American Culture,” Journal of American Folklore 102
(1989): 7-8.

20Samnuel B. Charters and Leonard Kunstadt, Jazz: A History of the New York Scene (New
York: Doubleday, 1961) 102-61.

21Gillespie 109.

22James Lincoln Collier, Benny Goodman and the Swing Era (New York: Oxford, 1989)
97. See also John Hammond, On Record, an Autobiography with Irving Townsend (New York:
Ayer, 1977) 64-66.

23Hammond 73.

Collier 98.

25John Chilton, Billie’s Blues: The Billie Holiday Story, 1933-1959 (New York: Da Capo,
1975) 14.

26Gunther Schuller, The Swing Era (New York: Oxford, 1989) 529.

27Chilton 44.

28Chilton 11.

22Scott Deveraux, “The Emergence of the Jazz Concert, 1935-1945,” American Music
(Spring, 1989): 8.

Collier 103.

3!Charters 248.

32Collier 153-54.

33Charters 238-40.

Collier 214-18.

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 29 ---
118 THE KENYON REVIEW

35Charters 257.

36Hammond 200.

37Hammond 201.

38Schuller 229.

Koch 22.

Schuller 547.

4'Schuller 564. See also Frank Biichmann-Mgller, Lester Young (Washington, D.C.:
Greenwood, 1988).

*2Schuller 440. See also Biichmann-M¢eller 45, and Collier 221.

“Biichmann-Mgller 45.

“4Biichmann-Mogller 104.

Schuller 548.

Schuller 548.

47§chuller 549.

48Biichmann-Mller 44. Quote from Schuller 549.

*Biichmann-Mgller 107.

Chilton 62.

5'Chilton 68-69.

Schuller 543; Chilton 69; Collier 306.

53In July 1957 ten years following her conviction and jail term for drug possession and
three months after the death of Lester Young, Eleanora Fagan McKay, Lady Day, died, seventy
cents left in her savings account. Schuller 546.

54Ira Gitler, Swing to Bop (New York: Oxford, 1985) 105.

Charters 268. This “discovery” story has several variants, and it is not clear who inserted
the sartorially outrageous Christian onto the bandstand that night, Hammond or several members
of Goodman’s group who felt sorry for the newcomer. All versions, however, converge on the
“he knocked their sox off’ conclusion of Christian’s playing.

Schuller 564.

57Ralph Ellison, Shadow and Act (New York: Random, 1972) 208. Ellison wrote these
middle essays on jazz for Saturday Review in the 1950s.

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 30 ---
PETER RUTKOFF and WILLIAM SCOTT 11g

>8Ellison 235; Schuller 563.

Collier 59, 263.

Schuller 572. See also Raymond Horricks, Dizzy Gillespie (New York: Hippocrene, 1984)
14.

6'Charters 314.

62] eonard Feather, liner notes, “The Harlem Jazz Scene— 1941,” Essoteric Records, 1957.

Collier 265.

4Horricks 14.

Davis 52. See also Horricks 13, and Feather.

S6Fllison 201.

®7Gillespie 140.

Kenny Clarke, interview, Paris, 30 Sept. 1977. Institute for Jazz Studies, Newark,
New Jersey (hereafter referred to as IJS).

©°Dan Morgenstern, liner notes, “Charlie Parker: First Recordings,” Onyx, 221.

Milt Hinton, interview, Washington, D.C., 1976. IJS.

TEllison 205.

Koch 35.

Quoted in many sources, including Koch 20 and Ellison 229.

74Russell 30.

Harry Reed, “The Black Bar in the Making of a Jazz Musician: Bird, Mingus, and Stan
Hope,” Journal of Jazz Studies 9.1 (1982): 77.

Brian Priestly, Charlie Parker (New York: Hippocrene, 1984) 15. See also Russell 62.

7Russell 85.

Russell 75.

James Patrick, “Charlie Parker,” 4.

8°Russell 143. Patrick invokes the idea of a contrafact, drawn from classical musical
analysis, wherein original melodies are discarded and new ones created on the basis of the original
chord structure. This, he and many others argue, was the basis of the bebop revolution (1—5).

8\Gillespie 116.

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 31 ---
120 THE KENYON REVIEW

®2Koch 29.

83Gillespie 72-79; Horricks 25.

84Horricks, photo, 55.

85Hinton.

86Hinton, interview 2, 1977. US.

87Gillespie 92.

88Nat Hentoff, Hear Me Talking to You (New York: Dover, 1957) 343.

89Hinton, interview 1976.

*Horricks 30.

*'Hentoff 350.

°2George Hoeffer, notes, “Hot Box.” Hoeffer, longtime columnist for Downbeat, deposited
his notes and rough drafts at the IJS.

*3Hoeffer 2/1/62. Clarke, interview.

4 Clarke.

Hoeffer 2/1/62. Clarke, interview.

Clarke.

*7Monk’s biographical information derives from several sources, including Hoeffer
2/11/48; Time 28 Feb. 1964 (Monk amazingly appeared on the cover); Collier 383. He actually
seems to have been born any time between 1917 (Grove) and 1920 (Hoeffer).

8 Joe Goldberg, Jazz Masters of the 50’s (New York, Da Capo, 1965) 28.

Goldberg 35.

'00Clarke.

10! Hoeffer 2/11/48.

'02Dan Morgenstern, “Charlie Parker’s First Recordings,” liner notes, Onyx, 221.

'03Garry Giddens, Robert Bergman, Will Freidwald, liner notes, “Charlie Parker: The
Complete ‘Birth of Bebop’,” Stash.

'04Gitler, Swing to Bop, 71.

'5Koch 30.

'6Gitler 69.

This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 32 ---
PETER RUTKOFF and WILLIAM SCOTT I2I
'07Ellison 210.
108 Gillespie 202-08.
'9Gillespie 151.
"0Koch 36.
"Gillespie 202.
'2Hinton 1977.
'BGillespie 149.
'l4Hentoff 340.
'I5Gillespie 145.
"6Gillespie 143.
"Davis 57.
"8Hentoff 350.
'9Gillespie 281.
'20Koch 63.
!21Gillespie 235.
'22Russell 167.
!23 Hinton.
!24Gillespie 287.
!25 Hinton.
!26Hinton.
!27Hinton.
8Russell 274.
'29Russell 274. The main theme of “Now’s the Time” became, in time, the “Hucklebuck.”
'30Paul Chevigny, Gigs. Jazz and the Cabaret Laws in New York (New York: Routledge,

1991) 4-22.
'31Gillespie 140.
'32Koch 35.
This content downloaded from
128.120.235.253 on Mon, 25 Jul 2022 20:19:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
