--- Page 1 ---
=
* CENTLEMEN a
_
/ j |
\"“ _
BE SEATED! .
i |
G srrcime in 1898, Al Jolson (1886-1950), later one of the , |
celebrated singers of the first half of the twentieth century, attended =
a vaudeville show at the Bijou Theater in Washington, D.C. Onstage -_
was the popular blackface minstrel Eddie Leonard (1875-1941), _
later the writer of “Ida” and ‘(Roll Dem) Roley Boley Eyes,” when j
Jolson, seated in an inexpensive balcony seat, rose — spontaneously {
or calculatedly — and joined in the singing of one of the day’s hits. It 7
was not unusual in those years for publishers to have their songs {
plugged in exactly that way.' Leonard was so impressed by young =
Jolson’s singing that he hired him as an adjunct to his act. !
Several years later, Jolson worked in blackface as a member of i
Lew Dockstader’s Minstrels. Although the minstrel show was essen- , |
tially a nineteenth-century entertainment, theatergoers as late as 1
1908 saw a minstrel show at the New York Theater that included =
Eddie Leonard as well as George ‘(Honey Boy” Evans and Julian a
Eltinge, two other burnt-cork minstrels. George M. Cohan (1878- _
1942), the eminent songwriter/actor, and his partner, Sam Harris, —
were trying to revive a dying tradition. Despite the limited business |
in a twenty-four-performance run, the Cohan and Harris Minstrels =
returned to the New York Theater again in August 1909 with a full- |
fledged production that included all the traditional elements of the a
minstrel show — interlocutor, end-men gags, jingling tambourines, _
4 |
‘fi i
17 =
4 ||
7 ee i "
y r
ae Fl

--- Page 2 ---
18 “GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!”
clacking bones, clog dancers, cakewalkers, an olio and walkaround, liam Christopher Hz-.-
etc. It was the last time that such a production appeared on Broad- performers who wers=
way. The era of the minstrel show was ended.” with the artistry of Dz-
By 1909 the world had been enjoying the blackface minstrel “Honey Boy” Evars MM
show for over sixty years. Its importance, despite its pejorative black great Bert Williams
caricature, cannot be overestimated, since it was not only America’s Working in biacsc
first export in the world of entertainment — Spirituals came later — Minstrels. The trac: 7 :-
but it was the incubator of Ragtime, vaudeville, the revue, bur- performers in the ‘z:z
lesque, and musical comedy, the major forms of American enter- century, anumber =<: 4
tainment before the advent of radio.? groes on the stage. a— :
In Black Manhattan (1930), James Weldon Johnson (1871- 1861) and Thomas Dz==
1938) assessed the contribution of the minstrel show as follows: As early as 1827 D:x:=
; ; ; bany, and two years =
Minstrelsy was, on the whole, a caricature of Negro life, and it fixed a where the Virgin‘z
stage tradition which has not yet been broken. It fixed the tradition of Black Rose.’ a fave --<
the Negro as only an irresponsible, happy-go-lucky, wide grinning, hi f , h a
loud laughing, shuffling, banjo-playing, singing, dancing sort of being. Sue Gt eT Teale
Nevertheless, the companies did provide stage training and theatrical described a Negro <2.
experience for a large number of coloured men . . . which, at the low-tail coat. (Twe stm
time, could not have been acquired from any other source.’ Coon, the city dane. =
skits of Williams a-2 #
The “companies,” in Johnson’s text, were companies of black min- “Daddy” Rice => >
strels, who also worked in blackface and emerged after the Civil credited with intrc 2. =
War, attaining a popularity that challenged the vogue of white, can popular music =
burnt-cork minstrels. result of seeing a c:::
The minstrel show was born in 1843. In that year, on the evening quirky dance rout:x.: =
of February 6, four performers pooled their talents to present a
musical entertainment at the Bowery Amphitheater on the Lower Turn abo:.: 2°
East Side of Manhattan. Appearing under the designation the “‘Vir- An’ erin :
ginia Minstrels,” the four white men performed in blackface as part
of a circus show. In the announcement of their presentation, the Appearing in blacs::.
New York Herald described them as “‘a novel, grotesque, original “Daddy” Ricescore2 zs
and surprisingly melodious Ethiopian band” and their music as a the first time, once 222°
combination of the sounds of “‘the banjo, violin, bone castanets and “Jim Crow” made 7:= |
tambourine.’”’ Remaining for one week in their performance of a his performances ». 272:
“Negro Concert” as part of the circus program, they not only sang, in England, where == =
but participated in two circus scenes.° The fact is the: 2. -
No one could have anticipated or predicted that these appear- also made appeara>.:=s
ances of the quartet would launch a uniquely American form of February 6, 1843. D-s
entertainment—a form whose popularity would sweep the nation writer of the grour >=
in the 1840s and 1850s, that would dominate the popular theater into and then as a mus:2::>
the twentieth century, and through which America’s first major pop- Self-taught on the =i:
ular songwriters and performers would emerge. It was the minstrel while in the orches:r: :
show that introduced the songs of Daniel Decatur Emmett, Stephen new interest in Nezr: :
Collins Foster, Gussie Davis, James A. Bland, and the talent of Wil- led to his debut 2s : >

--- Page 3 ---
‘iM
|
ro
“GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!” 19 :
liam Christopher Handy. Among a notable array of black and white —
performers who worked in blackface, the world became acquainted a
with the artistry of Dan Bryant, E. P. Christy, Eddie Leonard, George —
“Honey Boy” Evans, McIntyre and Heath, George Primrose, and the _
great Bert Williams.
Working in blackface was not an innovation of the Virginia , |
Minstrels. The tradition has been traced back to British music-hall
performers in the late eighteenth century. In the early nineteenth P|
century, a number of Americans performed impersonations of Ne-
groes on the stage, among whom George Washington Dixon (1808 - i
1861) and Thomas Dartmouth “Daddy” Rice (1808-— 1860) stand out,
As early as 1827 Dixon presented stage portrayals of blacks in Al-
bany, and two years later performed at the very Bowery Theater
where the Virginia Minstrels first appeared, introducing “Coal
Black Rose,”’ a favorite song of the minstrels. Dixon claimed author- \
ship of another minstrel song favorite, “Long Tail Blues,” which _
described a Negro dandy ona Sunday stroll in a high-fashion swal- |
low-tail coat. (Two standard characters of the minstrels were Zip
Coon, the city dandy, and Jim Crow, the plantation slave, asin many q
skits of Williams and Walker.)°®
“Daddy” Rice, known as the “father of American minstrelsy,”’ is
credited with introducing the first international song hit of Ameri-
can popular music. “Jim Crow” was a song he developed as the |
result of seeing a deformed black stable-hand perform a strange, a
quirky dance routine as he worked and sang 3 |
—
Turn about an’ wheel about an’ do jes so /
An’ ebery time I turn about, I jump Jim Crow.?
Appearing in blackface and old rags, and imitating the dance,
“Daddy” Rice scoreda sensation when he introduced the routine for
the first time, once again at the Bowery Theater, in November 1832.
“Jim Crow” made him famous not only in the United States, where fil
his performances were greeted with enthusiasm in city after city, but a
in England, where he made a standout tour in 1836, ; |
The fact is that all four members of the Virginia Minstrels had
also made appearances in blackface before the show they gave on ma
February 6, 1843. Daniel Decatur Emmett (1815- 1904), the song- j
writer of the group and the best known, worked briefly as a printer |
and then as a musician in the years before the quartet was formed. 1
Self-taught on the fiddle, he later learned to play drums, fife, and, q
while in the orchestra of the Cincinnati Circus, the banjo. It was “a _
new interest in Negro impersonation,”’ Hans Nathan tells us, ‘‘that q
led to his debut as a banjo player and singer in the circus ring, 4
; |
a
4 \
1
e
‘

--- Page 4 ---
15 Ere Bie Sey See
undoubtedly in blackface.’’* In this capacity, he worked with Francis torming nis ~irs--e
Marion Brower (1823-1874), another member of the Virginia Min- Orleans iv nis c2--
strels, who was a highly regarded bones player and ‘“‘one of the savor the fame: C-
foremost blackface dancers of the day.’’? Performing separately and Settling in Buz: :-
together in various circuses, the two settled in New York City by late minstrel comzz-.
1842. Here, their appearance in a new variety theater attracted knowledge azé s-::
newspaper notices, hailing Emmett as “the great Southern banjo church singer nat
melodist’” and Brower as ‘‘the perfect representation of the South- Christy's O- =--
ern Negro character.’’!° the troupe of 2c. -«
The other two members of the Virginia Minstrels, William M. ing through the Wwe
Whitlock (b. 1813) and Richard Ward Pelham (b. 1815), were both Palmo’s Opera H: =
New Yorkers and experienced blackface performers. Whitlock, debut to coincide -+-
whose banjo-playing skill attracted the great P. T. Barnum as his pian Serenaders -.-
manager, was said to have acquired “‘his accurate knowledge of the after the rise of --=
peculiarities of plantation and cornfield Negroes’’!! by close obser- chanics’ Hall o- 3-
vation of Southern life while on tour. As a dancer, ‘defying all de stand, During thes -
niggers in de world to charm de people,” according to a contempo- New York entertz:--
rary playbill,!? Whitlock was surpassed by Pelham, who frequently strel troupes, inclz.
performed with his younger brother in ‘“‘Negro Peculiarities, Dances a New York apzez-
and Extravaganzas.”’? shows, a critic inc: zz
What made the February 6 presentation of the four unique was said of Christy's tr-—:
not the burnt cork they used to blacken their faces but the format, and again.’’!6 |
their performing together as an ensemble and, through their It was during --:
clothes, makeup, and dialect, creating an identifiable (plantation) the format and ro=:-
setting; in short, their creating a framework that made their individ- pattern thereafter :-
ual contributions into a show. strels, with the exacz
The presentation at the Bowery Amphitheater was followed by wearing white glow:
appearances at the Cornucopia, a ‘‘sporting saloon’”’ on Park Row, overture. Christy as =:
and the Olympic Circus at the Park Theatre, where they added new the traditional mins:
bits in the form of ‘lectures’ and conundrums. It was not until proceeded to excha-
March 7 and 8, at the Masonic Temple in Boston, that their ‘‘Ethio- men, Mr. Tambo, oz :
pian Concert” occupied a full evening for the first time and that the ous banter would be
format of ‘‘minstrel music and scenes by a minstrel band,’ garbed The second par:
as Negro plantation slaves, approached what later became known as presumably from th
a minstrel show. The instruments they played, especially the banjo, pourri” —involveda
bones, and tambourine, became the instruments of the minstrel chronology, George »
show, as the semicircle, with the bones player at one end, the tam- Summertime”: a baz
bourine man at the other, and the emcee or interlocutor in the dance to Eddie Leor.
middle became standard. liams delivering in '
Chord” or his self-dep
Edwin P. Christy, who tried unsuccessfully to dispute the prior- ing almost in falsettc
ity of the Dan Emmett troupe as the originators of the minstrel show, Calling Caroline,” fo
is generally credited with stylizing it. Born in Philadelphia in 1815, company, descending
Christy was involved with Afro-American culture early in his career the Bell in the Lighth
and performed as a blackface musician and comic singer before In the final segme

--- Page 5 ---
“GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!” 21
forming his minstrel troupe. Working with a group of slaves in New
Orleans in his early twenties, he had ample opportunity to view and 3
savor the famed Congo Square singing and dancing of the slaves.
Settling in Buffalo in the late 1930s, where he later organized his first | |
minstrel company, he entertained in blackface and amplified his
knowledge and store of Negro lore through contact with a black |
church singer whom he acknowledged as One-Legged Hanson.'*

Christy’s Original Band of Virginia Minstrels was what he called |
the troupe of four performers he founded in about 1843. After tour- |
ing through the West, he made his first New York appearance at =
Palmo’s Opera House, on April 27, 1846. He apparently timed this
debut to coincide with the departure on a British tour of the Ethio- .
pian Serenaders, who had entertained at the White House just a year
after the rise of the Virginia Minstrels. In 1847 Christy leased Me-
chanics’ Hall on Broadway for what lengthened into a ten-year BI
stand. During those years, the Christy Minstrels became as populara _
New York entertainment as Barnum’s Museum, surpassing all min- |
strel troupes, including the Ethiopian Serenaders, who returned for , |
a New York appearance at Palmo’s in 1847. Comparing the two , |
shows, a critic indicated he had little desire to return to Palmo’s but 1
said of Christy’s troupe: ‘We listen and laugh and desire to go again _
and again.’’!® fo

It was during the long run of the troupe at Mechanics’ Hall that =
the format and routines of the Minstrel Show crystallized into a |
pattern thereafter followed by other troupes. The blackface min- mm
strels, with the exaggerated, elliptical mouths outlined in white, and a
wearing white gloves, marched onstage to a spirited, up-tempo =
overture. Christy as the interlocutor sounded the words that marked im
the traditional minstrel opening —‘‘Gentlemen, Be Seated!’’— and _
proceeded to exchange gags, generally plays on words, with the end ] |
men, Mr. Tambo, on his right, and Mr. Bones, on his left. The humor- ZZ
ous banter would be interspersed with a song or two. =

The second part of the show, known after a time as the olio— 1
presumably from the Spanish olla, for ‘‘salmagundi,” or “pot- 4
pourri’’— involved a succession of specialty numbers: disregarding q |
chronology, George ‘‘Honey Boy” Evans singing ‘In the Good Old i
Summertime”; a banjo solo on ‘Ballin’ the Jack’; a soft-shoe tap q
dance to Eddie Leonard’s “‘Ida (Sweet as Apple Cider)”; Bert Wil- { |
liams delivering in his talk/comic style “Play That Barbershop i
Chord” or his self-deprecating ‘“‘“Nobody’’;a silver-voiced tenor sing- fF
ing almost in falsetto a sentimental ballad, “Can’t You Hear Me q |
Calling Caroline,” followed shortly by the basso profundo of the 1
company, descending to the lowest notes he could reach in ‘‘When 4
the Bell in the Lighthouse Rings (Ding, Dong).” ;

In the final segment, there might be a ‘“‘stump speech,” a humor- ' |

|
i :
_
q iq
: co = __ a

--- Page 6 ---
22 “GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!”
ous address by one of the end men on a topical subject in black Civil War, thouz- 2
dialect and full of malapropisms; or a farcical parody, a Negro ver- of ‘Mason ané 2:
sion of Macbeth such as Henry Woods’s Minstrels presented in 1852; 10 (dix), emplc.=z
or a slapstick scene, involving shenanigans such as pie-throwing. 10-dollar bill issu
The entire company participated in a rousing finale, known after a “‘dixie’’?18
time as a walk-around,"” in which singers and dancers did a bit to On its intrc 22>
handclapping, tambourine-shaking, and bones-clacking by the with such enthus-zs
company, arranged in a colorful circle. New York was * -_s
called the song :-
Bryant’s Minstrels are most often remembered because of Dan- duced... Ithas>
iel Decatur Emmett’s association with the troupe, and especially the globe.””!9 B. =
because Emmett’s great song, ‘‘Dixie,’’ was written for and intro- the Confederac. ==.
duced by it. But Dan Bryant deserves recognition as one ofa group of by the Rumsey 2-2
Irishmen who contributed to the vogue of minstrelsy — George than a year later .-
Christy, Matt Campbell, and Billy Emerson were others — andas the production of P:-:
organizer and producer of one of the best early minstrel troupes, So exciting was 7+
along with Christy. the audience cexmz
A company of 12, Bryant’s Minstrels was formed by Dan Bryant Confederacy wer: ;
in 1857, after he had worked with various other troupes. Associated Before they mace =
with him in his new venture were his brothers Jerry, who played edly ordered the z_z
tambourine and bones, and Neil, who was an outstanding performer Although the
on accordion and flutina. Dan was himself proficient on banjo, Confederacy, at ==
bones, and tambourine, and was a superior dancer and comic, tal- as “‘LilliMarlere =
ents he shared with Jerry. Both were expert in handling Negro dia- about a prostitute =>
lect. Opening on February 25, 1857, at Mechanics’ Hall, a showplace was picked up by B-
at 472 Broadway previously occupied and popularized by the Christy wartime favorite 2:
Minstrels, Bryant’s troupe remained in residence for almost 10 der at Appomatt<+
years, eliciting continued praise and drawing crowds even during part of the North s =
the financial crisis of 1858. the White House >_
That Emmett had much to do with the success of the Bryant necessarily pro-Ne=
troupe seems unquestionable. Joining in October-November of use they (Confederz
1858, he remained with the company until 1866, the year of its damned if I’d have -
demise, except for one brief season at the outbreak of the Civil War Emmett deriv::
when he mistakenly thought their business would slacken off. Dur- he sold it outright =:
ing those years, Emmett sang, acted in comical skits (some of which February 1861. ‘IW
he probably wrote), played several instruments, and, most impor- the first authorizec =
tant of all, wrote songs and the music for the rousing walk-arounds. newspapers, while
The high point of Emmett’s association with Bryant and, per- walk-arounds, adar
haps, in retrospect, the high point of Bryant minstrelsy came with ances in the South
the presentation of “Dixie” on April 4, 1859. According to interviews edition, on which Ez
he gave, Emmett wrote the piece on a rainy Sunday in response to All of these develoz:
Bryant’s request for a walk-around for a Monday rehearsal. The song, which, in Haz
inclement weather supposedly accounted for the basic idea, when song successes of th.
Emmett or his wife remarked, ‘I wish I was in Dixie.” The word abroad as well.’’??
Dixie had become an emblem for the South in the years before the As the Virginie
, Hl wi

--- Page 7 ---
“GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!” 23
Civil War, though its origin is a matter of uncertainty. A contraction
of ‘Mason and Dixon line’? A derivation from the French word for F
10 (dix), employed in New Orleans and given currency through a
10-dollar bill issued by a Louisiana bank and referred to as a
“dixie’’?18 |
On its introduction, according to Emmett, ‘‘Dixie” was received |
with such enthusiasm that “‘before the end of the week, everybody in |
New York was whistling it.”” By April 10, 1861, the New York Clipper
called the song ‘‘one of the most popular compositions ever pro- |
duced . . . Ithas been sung, whistled and played in every quarter of _—
the globe.’’!? By then, the song had begun to settle in as a favorite of _
the Confederacy, the first Southern performance having been given ,
by the Rumsey and Newcomb Minstrels in December of 1860. Less 7
than a year later, in March 1861, it was interpolated in a Zouaves —
production of Pocahontas at the Variétés Theater in New Orleans. j
So exciting was the presentation by the full Zouaves company that a
the audience demanded numerous encores. Soon soldiers of the ; |
Confederacy were singing ‘‘Dixie’’ with improvised martial lyrics. 7
Before they made their assault at Gettysburg, General Pickett report- _
edly ordered the playing of the song to raise the morale of his troops. -—
Although the Civil War established ‘‘Dixie”’ as a ballad of the |
Confederacy, at the war’s end it had acquired the same duple status =
as “Lilli Marlene” did in World War II. AGerman sentimental ballad =
about a prostitute and a favorite of German soldiers, ‘Lilli Marlene” |
was picked up by British troops, and in English translation became a _
wartime favorite and, still later, an American hit. After Lee’s surren- a.
der at Appomattox, President Lincoln suggested that ‘“‘Dixie’’ was _
part of the North’s spoils of war and requested that the band outside
the White House play it. Opposed to Southern separatism but not P|
necessarily pro-Negro, Emmett said earlier: “If I had known to what
use they (Confederate bands) were going to put my song, I will be m=
damned if I’d have written it.’’° a
Emmett derived more renown than returns from the song, for til
he sold it outright to Firth, Pond & Co. fora total payment of $300 in :
February 1861. ‘‘I Wish I Was in Dixie’s Land,” the title under which a
the first authorized edition appeared, was reprinted in songsters and _
newspapers, while minstrel companies coopted the melody for a
walk-arounds, adapting and parodying its words. After perform- Py
ances in the South, a New Orleans company published a pirated
edition, on which Emmett was not even credited with authorship.?!
All of these developments serve to emphasize the popularity of the rT
song, which, in Hans Nathan’s words, ‘“‘became one of the greatest :
song successes of the nineteenth century, not only in America but ;
abroad as well.’’2? P|
As the Virginia and Bryant’s Minstrels gave the world one of ee
a
7
4 !
ees ;
je a
Ru | il
: ua ‘ ; ; ,
\ i ir , e "

--- Page 8 ---
ER  _ __<___ OO ee
24 “GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!”
America’s major songwriters in Daniel Decatur Emmett, Christy’s to support hires:
Minstrels has the distinction of having introduced the songs of Ste- songs, popular ><
phen Foster, the foremost creator of plantation songs and one of When he died :- =
America’s supreme songwriters. having suffereé 2-.
Foster has also been described as “the first American song- he lived (separz7z2
writer to support himself with his compositions.”’?3 It was more ofan frayed suit, whic> =
attempt than an achievement. In 1849, when he was 23 years old, paper containi=: 72
Foster, having worked as a bookkeeper in his brother’s commercial and Gentle Heer
house in Cincinnati for several years, made a decision to leave the 1949, titled “Dez:
business world. Inspired by his contact with the publishing firm of liad and Sar— 7
Firth and Pond, he returned to his hometown, Pittsburgh, and set up Crosby).
an office as a full-time songwriter. By then he had already written “Vacillatiz:
“Oh! Susanna” and ‘Uncle Ned.” With performances by the popular back ofa lette-.—
Nelson Kneass and his Ethiopian Troupe, the Original Christy Min- that he had sol: <:-=:
strels, and the celebrated Southern Sable Harmonists, and publica- andcomposer -~
tion in New York, as sung by the Christy Minstrels, and in Cincinnati, Su TEARS reir 2"=
“Oh! Susanna” had become a nationwide favorite. It ranked in popu- on the sheet rus:
larity with the famous “‘Zip Coon” song, as sung byG. W. Dixon. Firth and his: name re—a
and Pond had, in fact, published an arrangement of “Oh! Susanna” E. P. Christy’ .- 3
by the brilliant pianist Henri Herz even before Foster was in touch 28 years, in 187-
with them. In his cerzrexr
The contract that Foster signed with Firth and Pond in 1849 wanted his nase a
provided for a two-cent royalty per copy sold, this at a time when pian songs) bv s:
most songwriters had to be satisfied with a flat fee. (Foster had another style -: — x
himself sold ‘‘Oh! Susanna” for a $100 fee plus some free copies of “done a grea: 22%
the sheet music, to W. C. Peters, who eventually earned $10,000 and refined people
more on the song.) Nevertheless, it was an intrepid move on Foster’s had decided -: =
part, since then-successful songwriters such as John Hill Hewitt shame and lex= e2.
(1801-1890), composer of the popular “The Minstrel’s Return’d same tiie dhax <i
from the War,” and Henry Russell (1812-1900), the writer of songwriter . a
‘Woodman! Spare that Tree!” could not exist simply on song royal- "Tice: Loe: sen mes
ties and had to supplement with teaching, journalism, and music was, wot witk:.< %
publishing (Hewitt) and recitals and concerts (Russell). Christy, who ws 2: 7a
Subsequent contracts with Firth and Pond, beginning in 1853, cation perfor z-<s
when his royalty was raised to 10% and an advance, were as favor- ship to blackiz:: —m
able as any songwriter could then expect. Yet from 1853 until his We know fice =z
death, in 1864, Foster’s financial history was one involving constant 1835, eight vez 7
borrowing from his brother, Morrison; drawing money from pub- was part of 21> 2s
lishers against anticipated royalties; selling the rights to future earn- house, and tkz: -: a
ings on various songs for flat sums; and in his final years, when his popular—"Z:z 2-1
exclusive contract with Firth, Pond & Co. expired, scribbling pot- "Toss Crow “an 2
boilers and selling them outright. In other words, while Foster de- Table, a grour --=-1
voted his life to songwriting and worked as a full-time professional Foster produz:: 7s
songwriter (except for a brief period in about 1851), he was not able published in :*-" -«

--- Page 9 ---
“GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!” 25
to support himself and his small family (one child) through his
songs, popular best-sellers and widely performed though they were. _
When he died in a ward in Bellevue Hospital in New York City, i
having suffered an alcoholic fall in the Bowery fleabag hotel where |
he lived (separated from his wife and child), they founda purse in his ; i
frayed suit, which contained 3 pennies, 35 cents in scrip, andaslip of |
paper containing the words fora possible future song, “Dear Friends =
and Gentle Hearts.” (The words were adapted for a popular song of
1949, titled ‘‘Dear Hearts and Gentle People,’ written by Bob Hil- ]
liard and Sammy Fain, and recorded by Dinah Shore and Bing
Crosby). _
“Vacillating skunk” was Christy’s scrawled comment on the oS
back of a letter written to him by Foster on May 25, 1852. Admitting -
that he had solicited Christy’s permission to place his name as writer i |
and composer on “‘Old Folks at Home,” Foster was asking to have his =
own name reinstated on the “Ethiopian Melody,’ as it was described
on the sheet music in 1851. Christy never consented to the change,
and his name remained on the song (‘‘Written and Composed by |
E. P. Christy’’) until the copyright’s first term expired, at the end of a
28 years, in 1879. f |
In his deferential letter, Foster explained that he originally .
wanted his name omitted, “owing to the prejudice against (Ethio- |
pian songs) by some, which might injure my reputation asa writer of 1
another style of music.” But having found that, by his efforts, he had =
‘done a great deal to build up a taste for Ethiopian songs among \
refined people . . .”. he wanted his name reinstated; moreover, he
| had decided “‘to pursue the Ethiopian business without fear or |
| shame and lend all my energies to making the business live, at the
: same time that I will wish to establish my name as the best Ethiopian 2
songwriter . . .’’24 i
That he succeeded in being ‘‘the best”’ is unquestioned. But it
| was not without manifesting the ambivalence that so irritated Z|
: Christy, who was paying Foster then and later a $10 fee for prepubli- |
| cation performances of his Ethiopian numbers. Foster’s relation-
ship to blackface minstrelsy actually began when he was still a boy. ;
We know from his brother Morrison that as a nine-year-old— in ;
1835, eight years before the Virginia Minstrels emerged — Stephen |
was part of a thespian company, performing in a nearby carriage
house, and that he starred as the singer of the Ethiopian songs then j
popular —‘‘Zip Coon,” “Long-Tailed Blue,” ‘Coal Black Rose,” and a
“Jim Crow.’’> Ten years later, as part of the Knights of the Square
Table, a group that met at his Pittsburgh home to harmonize for fun, j |
Foster produced his first two Ethiopian songs: ‘‘Lou’siana Belle,” =
| published in 1847 by W. C. Peter of Cincinnati, and “Old Uncle Ned.” {
a:
5 i i
|

--- Page 10 ---
26 “GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!”
It was for this group that Foster also wrote ‘Oh! Susanna,” the first of in 1894 for “r.s..2
his songs to be associated with the Christy Minstrels. tells of a tragic 27 24
The bulk of the “plantation melodies,” as Foster’s minstrel Wright wasa vr: 2
songs in slave dialect are designated, were written before 1853, with when he and *:: 42
his peak creativity between 1851 and 1853, when he produced “‘Old crowd storme= +:
Folks at Home” (1851), ‘‘Massa’s in de Cold Ground” (1852), ‘““My ening tolynch =
Old Kentucky Home, Good Night’ (1853) and “Old Dog Tray” night, when thz 72
(1853), 4 of his most popular numbers. By 1850 Foster had actually again refusec 7: =~
published 12 minstrel songs, which, though they are not nowas well Beatings failec =: -x
known as the four, were staples of the minstrel-show repertory. But mob recognizé2 ~z
even these surpassed standard minstrel repertory, were written by night, the sher.= -#
Foster in four-part harmony, and contained choruses, which are not tongue cut ou: itu
to be found even in his so-called ‘‘English” songs. In contrasting the Chicago.*!
“Ethiopian” melodies with the “English” songs, Charles Hamm ob- “Black m:ns-72
serves that Foster ‘‘transformed the genre (Ethiopian) and made it crimination tr: >
expressive of sentiments far removed from those of the ‘nigger minating stuc. =<
songs.’ ’’6 regularly insu.:2: x
Despite this achievement and the recognition that came to him and Run’ sigzs
as a result of this genre, Foster was apparently more concerned when a New Yr: 2
about the acceptance of his “English” songs. He called songs of the estimated 2,0¢° \=
“Jeanie with the Light Brown Hair’ type “poetic,” the ‘‘Oh! Su- names.*
sanna”’ genre “comic,” and the “Old Folks at Home’”’ style ‘‘pa- Black mins:r=
thetic’’; that is, expressing pathos. In an evocative study of these people, not “urz<--
three types and their changing meanings for different artists, critics, tury. Being a mins=
and times, William H. Austin concludes that Foster’s interest in the tance; a measur: 2°
two Ethiopian types fluctuated, but “‘his interest in the ‘Jeanie’ type opportunity to <7 =
was constant.’’2? out the worlc T-x
Nevertheless, as we know, Foster’s position in the annals of singers, music:i=:
popular song is based on the Ethiopian songs. Of the ‘‘poetic”’ or large-scale opz: ==
“English” type—that is, the sentimental ballads— only two have Although c:-2
achieved widespread acceptance: ‘‘Beautiful Dreamer” and “Jeanie pearances as csr.
with the Light Brown Hair.’”’ The posthumous fame of “Beautiful Brooker and C.2-~:+
Dreamer” was almost predictable, since it was “the last song ever first-class blacs =>...
written by Stephen C. Foster, composed but a few days before his troupe, and it crz-. -
death.’’?8 But “Jeanie,” written in 1854 presumably because of Fos- that other cormzz-.
ter’s separation from his wife, Jane, did not become a hit until 1941. strels” designa:: : -
It was then in the public domain, so that Foster’s estate received no synonym for C:.:-s
royalties from the extensive performances of the ballad that year.”? formers from 7.2:
them as men 7: °
If the tremendous popularity of the minstrel show needed con- former lives in >>> =
firmation, the rise and growth of companies of black minstrels, authenticity, sh:-. =
which occurred after the Civil War, provided invincible proof. as ‘great delinez:: 7
W. C. Handy (1873-1958), author of ‘‘St. Louis Blues,”’ worked Charles Hics: «
as bandmaster and cornet soloist with Mahara’s Minstrels, starting nizing and manzz-

--- Page 11 ---
“GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!” 27 |
in 1894 for “twelve or fourteen years.’’*° In his autobiography, he
tells of a tragic incident involving a member of the company. Louis
Wright was a proud minstrel, who defiantly cursed a crowd of whites
when he and his lady friend were snowballed in Missouri. An angry i i
crowd stormed the theater where the troupe was appearing, threat-
ening to lynch Wright, who dispersed them by firing a gun. Later that |
night, when the minstrels’ railroad car was surrounded and Wright /
again refused to give himself up, the entire company was arrested. i
Beatings failed to force identification of Wright. However, one of the
mob recognized him, and he was taken into custody. During the
night, the sheriff released Wright to the mob. He was lynched, his /
tongue cut out, and his mutilated body shipped to his mother in =
Chicago.*! _
“Black minstrels experienced the widest possible range of dis- ,
crimination from trivial to deadly,”” Robert C. Toll states in his illu- 7
minating study, Blacking Up. “Being denied their basic needs and
regularly insulted and threatened with things like the ‘Nigger Read
and Run’ signs . . . were everyday experiences.’”? Nevertheless, _
when a New York promoter advertised for 40 black minstrels, an =
estimated 2,000 Negroes appeared at his office and 1,012 left their
names.°? =
Black minstrel shows were inordinately popular with black @
people, not “upper-crust” Negroes, throughout the nineteenth cen- |
tury. Being a minstrel gave an entertainer stature, class, and impor- _
tance; a measure of financial stability; and, most of all, mobility, an
opportunity to travel not only in this country but, at times, through-
out the world. The minstrel show afforded black songwriters, _
singers, musicians, comics, dancers, and impersonators the first 4
large-scale opportunity to enter American show business. |
Although companies of black minstrels made ephemeral ap- 7”
pearances as early as 1855, it was not until the organization of =
Brooker and Clayton’s Georgia Minstrels in 1865 that a permanent, a
first-class black troupe came into existence. So impressive was this ; |
troupe, and it drew such enormous crowds throughout the North,
that other companies sought to capitalize on the ‘“‘Georgia Min- t i
strels’ designation, which was used so frequently that it became a i
synonym for Colored Minstrels. Seeking to distinguish their per- 7
formers from blackface whites, Brooker and Clayton publicized |
them as men who ‘were slaves in Macon” and who “‘spent their |
former lives in bondage.” Critics responded favorably to the claim of |
authenticity, showering praise on “the genuine plantation darkies” |
as “great delineators of genuine darky life in the South.”** j
Charles Hicks, who started his own company in 1866 after orga- -
nizing and managing the Brooker and Clayton troupe, likewise ad-
a
i
a
i

--- Page 12 ---
28 “GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!”
vertised his black minstrels as Slave Troupes and Georgia Slave of plantatic-. = §
Brothers. Respected by his white contemporaries as an aggressive strels plaves :: =m
promoter, Hicks worked tirelessly but not entirely successfully to 1881, when <--> ma
own a company. In 1870, after organizing several short-lived sensational -. =: sa
troupes, he took his first black troupe to Germany and England. On While Kz =—wa
his return, he managed Callender’s Georgia Minstrels as well as and Charles =—m
Sprague and Blodgette’s Georgia Minstrels, after struggling with Callender’s -=+ ™
two unsuccessful companies of his own—African Minstrels and Haverly over:
Georgia Minstrels. In 1877 he managed to lure a company of black tablished C= ae
minstrels from white owners, J. H. Haverly and Tom Maguire, and of the Eart= : * :amq
took them for a three-year tour of Australia. luxurious cr 72cm

In 1881-1882 he again persuaded a troupe to leave its ted Minstre.< =e
management — this time it was Callender— only to buckle under rate compa-.=+
the formidable power of the Frohmans, Gustave and Charles, who “White-- .-
came to Callender’s resuce. By 1885, when Billy Kersands (1842- sure,” Rode-
1915), the most celebrated black comic minstrel, organized a com- cussed auc:e-:+
pany of his own, Hicks again surfaced as manager. Again Hicks left to Most ofall :-= 3
form his own troupe, this time in a short-lived partnership with A. D. entertainers —
Sawyer, another ambitious black entrepreneur. After the breakup, So mare 2-zt
Hicks again took a troupe to Australia and New Zealand. A versatile and 1884 t-z: zt
performer, accomplished as singer, end man, and interlocutor, and “Non-colorz: -
a dynamic manager — but successful ‘‘only in marginal areas that served: “Al --=
whites did not covet and control’’35— Hicks died in Surabaya, Java, musicians. -- =
while touring with a black minstrel company in 1902. gotthema. ~

By the early 1870s, whites owned the most successful black The hiz>=s -
minstrel companies, and even though the success of these troupes nown wast: -=
depended on black stars, ‘Negroes had to struggle to retain owner- a saucer as -=
ship of any companies at all.’’3° In the careers of black minstrels, Tom Fletch:: <a
three white entrepreneurs played large roles. owners arrz>i=2 ff

In 1872 Charles Callender, a white tavern-keeper, purchased theater fro~ --=
the Sam Hague integrated minstrel troupe on its return from En- gallery wits. -.2
gland. Employing Charles Hicks as business manager and featuring The sec: >: my
comedians Billy Kersands, Pete Devonear, and Bob Height, a comic Tenor ofthe - : =
who was later compared to Bert Williams, Callender attracted such there were --=:
crowds and favorable reviews that his name quickly joined ‘‘Geor- Then there -. =-
gia” as identification of outstanding black troupes. Despite competi- Stage,” as Je- =
tion from 27 other black companies, business boomed for Cal- Sam Luzi:
lender, whose troupe was the only black minstrel troupe mentioned back on m:r:-7#
in alist of leading American minstrel companies in 1877. But in June while he scuz-- se
of the following year, Callender sold his Georgia Minstrels to J. H. Hyer Sisters .-
Haverly, another white giant in the minstrel field, blackface as well Undergrou’:2 = 2:
as black. Haverly not only advertised as extensively as Callender but the first blac» —:
augmented the personnel to as many as 100 and focused the presen- 1890 he pe: =:
tations on so-called realistic, but actually romanticized, portrayals example or 7.224

--- Page 13 ---
| |
“GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!” 29 Ef
of plantation life. Like Callender earlier, Haverly’s Colored Min-
strels played to turnaway crowds, attaining a peak in the summer of , |
1881, when they followed his blackface Mastodons to England fora |
sensational year’s tour.

While Haverly’s company was abroad, ex-advance men Gustave =
and Charles Frohman, later producers on Broadway, purchased _
Callender’s new troupe, added Haverly’s Colored Minstrels when =
Haverly overextended himself, and, retaining Callender’s name, es-
tablished Callender’s Consolidated Colored Minstrels —“The Pick fi
of the Earth’s Colored Talent.” Pursuing an eye-catching pattern of 4
luxurious productions and flamboyant advertising, the Consolida- i
ted Minstrels gained such acceptance that by late 1882, three sepa- 1
rate companies were touring the country.

“White-owned-and-structured shows had the greatest expo-
sure,” Robert C. Toll concludes, “made the most money and fo-
cussed audience expectations on stereotyped images of Negroes. ;
Most of all, they illustrated that when blacks became marketable as
entertainers, it was white men who reaped the profits.’’37

So marketable were black minstrels in the years between 1880 |
and 1884 that an advertisement for minstrels in the Clipper read: =
“Non-colored performers need not apply.’ And W. C. Handy ob-
served: “All the best black talent—the composers, the singers, the Pd
musicians, the speakers, the stage performers — the Minstrel Show |
got them all.’’39 -

The highest-paid black minstrel was Billy Kersands, whose re-
nown was the result ofa gigantic mouth, which could holda cup and
a saucer as he danced. Billy was such an attraction, according to i |
Tom Fletcher, that in St. Louis, “prejudice was half forgotten as the
owners arranged for colored customers to occupy a full half of the i
theater from the ground floor or orchestra section right up to the , |
gallery with whites filling the other side.’”4° 7

The second highest paid was Wallace King, the Sweet Singing —
Tenor of the noted Callender troupe of 1882. Among banjo virtuosos,
there were the Bohees, James and George, and Horace Weston. Lf
Then there was Sam Lucas, “The Grand Old Man of the Negro
Stage,” as James Weldon Johnson dubbed him in Black Manhattan. -—

Sam Lucas (1840-1916) worked as a barber and constantly fell _
back on minstrelsy jobs as singer, composer and character actor |
while he sought serious dramatic roles. Costarring with the famous =
Hyer Sisters in such musical dramas as Out of Bondage and The _
Underground Railroad between minstrel appearances, he became ;
the first black man to play the lead in Uncle Tom’s Cabin (1878). In —
1890 he performed in Sam T. Jack’s Creole Show, an early, primitive -—
example of black musical comedy, and, toward the end of the dec- | |

|

f |

_
I

--- Page 14 ---
30 ZENTLEMEN BE SEATED
ade, in A Trip to Coontown, regarded as the first Negro musical to sub ste- owl
make a complete break with minstrelsy. As the climax to his career, Lows
he became the first black to star in a film (Uncle Tom’s Cabin). Mer es7y
Unfortunately, in one of the scenes, he had to jump into a partially natiin 128. Sig
frozen river to save Little Eva. He developed pneumonia as a result fOr Ad=css.: > mo
of the exposure and died in January 1916. jected t2ia~ mm
The list of minstrel performers of distinction is long. Into the in orcer i: m=
twentieth century, the minstrel show served as a launching pad not York wit i+
only for white singers like Al Jolson and comics including Eddie lishec si.2—=
Cantor, but for black artists, including several of the classic Blues “Goocz.e 12
singers. Gertrude ‘‘Ma” Rainey (1886-1939) traveled for a period Davis 21
with her own troupes as well as the Rabbit Foot Minstrels, whose songs tc 2:27 = 7s
personnel included a young Bessie Smith (1894-1937), later cele- sentiment. —aes
brated as Empress of the Blues. craze, ne .7 cm
One of the more significant phases of minstrelsy was its role in “The Coir Tra
developing the creative talents of the first popular black song- BlackC:-- @
writers: Ernest Hogan, Gussie L. Davis, James A. Bland, Bert Wil- Baby" (825 gq
liams (who will be discussed in the next chapter), and W. C. Handy, nappec e2Crc- 3
among others. entered :- 2: : 71s
Ernest Hogan (1859-1909) born Reuben Crowder, in Ken- most por.z> som
tucky, served as end man with the great Bert Williams in minstrel He also wr: +: arg
shows; did a cakewalk in Summer Nights (1897) at the Casino Roofin Dixie, whim » te
New York City; produced the first show with syncopated music in ballad ‘In =>: Sa
1905, starring the so-called Memphis Students —they were neither Billy Johrs:-
students nor from Memphis; and is best known for the biggest ‘coon ducer of Bz: 2
song” hit, ‘‘All Coons Look Alike to Me”’ (1896), which he regretted “female bar: -#"¥
writing all his life and which will be discussed later in this book. copies.
Gussie Lord Davis (1863 - 1899), who is not as well-known as the in am i@i<—-
other writer/performers under consideration, was described in the Davis assem-=: =
newspapers, circulars and sheet music of his day as “Cincinnati’s and thathe- =: ag
Only Colored Author and Comedian,” ‘“‘the most popular author and The“coorns:-: we
composer the race has produced,” and ‘“‘the race’s most prolific numbers. > ~72t a
writer.” He was unquestionably the most-published black song- among “re=>+: 3
writer of the years between 1880 and 1899, the year of his death in menandwc> > zm
Whitestone, New York. He has more recently been describedas “‘the home. She cz-- 23
first black songwriter to succeed in Tin-Pan Alley,’’*! which is ac- refined pec>.= wem
ceptable if the reference to Tin Pan Alley is not taken literally, since mother sore: =~ ttt
that cognomen did not come into existence until 20 or more years this genre 0: s:-—m
after Davis’s death. (‘Tin Pan Alley,” asa description ofa closely knit of readers ci >:
microcosm of publishers and songwriters, was first applied to an cuse proper”. > 7sem
area in New York City by songwriter/journalist Monroe H. Rosen- that lurk deez.
feld in about 1911. A concentration of music firms was then to be melodies, Dz.-: xa
found on a block between Fifth Avenue and Broadway on 28th America... "*=—
Street.) But it is a matter of record that Davis was successful in add to the lac-- 1
having 200 or more of his songs published by 24 different New York The admr:-:- 75

--- Page 15 ---
= AI!
“GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!” 31 i”
publishers, and by publishers in Cincinnati, Boston, Chicago, and St.
Louis. i”
“Maple on the Hill,” Davis’s first song, was published in Cincin-
nati in 1880. Seeking to enhance his musical education, he applied
for admission to the Nelson Musical College, in his native city. Re- L |
jected because he was black, he took ajob as ajanitor for $15 a month =
in order to receive private instruction. In 1887 he moved to New
York with the support of white George Propheter, who had pub-
lished several of his songs in Cincinnati, and who now published
“Goodbye, Old Home, Goodbye” and “The Court House in the Sky.” |
Davis was a versatile professional writer, whose ability to create _
songs to fit the needs of various black minstrels for comic, sacred, or |
sentimental material, made him a favorite. During the “‘coon song” { |
craze, he wrote quite a number, including “That Strange Coon,” | |
“The Coon That I Suspected” (1895), “I’m the Father of a Little 1 !
Black Coon” (1897), “Nigger, You Won’t Go” (1898), “Only a Nigger ‘
Baby” (1898), and ‘“‘There’d Never Been No Trouble If They Kid- |
napped a Coon” (1899). For “Send Back the Picture and the Ring,”
entered in a contest sponsored by the New York World among the 10
most popular songwriters of the day, he won a prize of $500 in 1895. =
He also wrote larger works, including the musical A Hot Old Time in | |
Dixie, which was on tour at his death. His biggest hit, the sentimental ”
ballad “In the Baggage Coach Ahead,” came in 1896. Introduced by |
Billy Johnson (1858-1916), a prominent minstrel and later a pro- §
ducer of Black Patti’s Troubadours, and popularized by the white
“female baritone” Imogene Comer, it reportedly sold overa million ,
copies. _
In an interview published in 1888 in the New York Evening Sun, =
Davis asserted that “the day of Negro and jubilee songs” was over, j
and that he was, accordingly, making a specialty of “waltz songs.” |
The “coon song” was then in the making, along with cakewalk dance |
numbers, so that Davis was really reacting to a market developing 4
among “refined people.” Distinguishing between the reaction of ,
men and women toasong, he stated: “A woman buys it and sings it at =
home. She cannot sing a minstrel or Negro song in the parlor, and =
refined people would not allow it in the house . . . Love and ,
mother songs are the taking songs.’”? Davis became such a master of j
this genre of sentimental, lachrymose ballad— so dear to the hearts |
of readers of Godey’s Lady Book —that historian Maxwell F. Mar- @
cuse properly observed: “Gussie Davis reached for the tender spots _
that lurk deep within all ofus . . . Inan era of ‘sing-’em-and-weep’ |
melodies, Davis did more than his share to open the tear ducts of
America .. . [Year after year he filled] another bucket of tears to -
add to the lachrymal ocean pouring out of Tin-Pan Alley.’’43 —
The admiration minstrels felt for Davis found expression ina —
|
i
i:
|
"a a .

--- Page 16 ---
32 “GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!”
poem that appeared posthumously in the Freeman. Spelling out London so.: ==
“Gussie L. Davis” vertically with the initial letter of each line, mers’ annus. ‘Nes
famous black minstrel Sam Lucas wrote a lament for the issue of 1920s. His :--2=-@
October 20, 1900. Bright Lig-: xem
James A. Bland (1856-1911) vied in output and, perhaps, ex- “De Golden * =zad
ceeded the 600 songs written by Gussie L. Davis. He has been called (1880); anc <i: 1
“the most prolific, famous and influential black minstrelsy song- Sprague’s C2: -om
writer,” “first major professional song composer,” and “‘the most Unlike C_=m
distinguished creator of sentimental Southern songs after Foster.’ ventional s> 2m
As with Davis, sentimental ballads were, indeed, Bland’s forte. But pictures of > .:-"zag
he plucked the heartstrings with songs, not about mother, children, larity amor: <te4
romantic love, and death, but about plantation life. By contrast with nostalgic ¢_: xan
Davis, Bland was a top notch performer, who was advertised as The mistresses =.: mug
World’s Greatest Minstrel Man and The Idol of the Music Halls.*° free from a>-7 sa
Born in Flushing, New York, and educated in Washington and gious songs :: 7a
at Howard University, he began a distinguished career as a minstrel and of ove>- saggy
when he was 19. It was a performance of the Primrose Minstrels, we sang, danct: mg
are told, that so excited him that he decided to leave Howard Univer- mouths.'*? 7- ssn
sity after only two years.** Having early mastered the banjo, he a white Blz- =
gigged around Washington until in 1875. He became the manager Williax = -w
of and starred in the Original Black Diamonds in Boston. There Blues, whic> : aes
followed stints with the Bohee Brothers Minstrels, Sprague’s Geor- as a song..r-:- #
gia Minstrels (when he reportedly outshone both Sam Lucas and publisher ¢:-=-umg
Billy Kersands) and Haverly’s Colored Minstrels, with whom he strelsy dur:-z -72f
went to England. There he remained for eight years, playing solo 1888, he jo:-z::
performances to turnaway crowds in England and on the Continent, strel show :- F.am
being billed as the Prince of Negro Songwriters and giving Com- wrote in kis ="
mand Performances before Queen Victoria and the Prince of Wales.
On his return to the United States in 1890, he joined the W. C. stepping 2. me"
Cleveland Colored Minstrel Carnival, passing up an offer from the We hac s::> mg
celebrated Kersands’ Minstrels. In the 1890s, as variety and vaude- how to =.i.: 2
ville began to supersede the minstrel show as an audience draw, his sands. ae b
career went into a down-spin. Although he sang with Black Patti’s osek Or
. : : modate 2 : _:
Troubadours, a vaudeville company, in 1898, his efforts to reestab- walkire = io
lish himself failed. At the time that he rejected the Kersands’ Min- rues =.
strels offer, he seems to have purchased “‘the largest diamond ever :
worn probably by a colored person, its weight being 44 carats.’’*” But Eventh: = @
when he died, in May 1911, he was a pauper, and was buried in an a few appezr:- =m
unmarked grave in Merion, Pennsylvania. It was not until 1939 that for minstré.; wm
the grave was located and not until 1946 that a tombstone was Henderso- *.:7g
erected, with funds supplied by ASCAP. hara’s Mins:-=.: am
By then, the State of Virginia had adopted as its official state gust 4, l8c> =: 1
song his ‘“‘Carry Me Back to Old Virginny,” published in 1878. “Oh, courseinlits =
Dem Golden Slippers,” published in 1879 and a sensation in his Negroes, in:.. 22g
: aie ere eneerereemateT f} nome
i ,
tie,
i) oil
: : , ae”
a ¥
- TT

--- Page 17 ---
\ !

“GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!” 33

London solo debut in 1882, has remained the theme of the Mum- |

mers’ annual New Year’s Day Parade in Philadelphia since the =

1920s. His other best-known songs include ‘In the Morning by the q

Bright Light,” described as an End Song in an 1879 publication; |

“De Golden Wedding” (1880); ““Hand Me Down My Walking Cane”

(1880); and “In the Evening by the Moonlight,” introduced by I

Sprague’s Georgia Minstrels.

Unlike Gussie Davis, whose sentimental songs dealt with con-
ventional subjects, Bland’s best-known songs presented sentimental ”
pictures of plantation life, which, perhaps, accounted for their popu- _
larity among the minstrel companies playing in the North. ‘‘His 1 |
nostalgic old darkies expressed great love for their masters and
mistresses,’ Robert Toll has observed, “his plantation songs were
free from antislavery protests and from praise of freedom; his reli- i
gious songs contained many stereotyped images of flashy dressers =
and of overindulgent parties; and his Northern Negroes strutted,
sang, danced, and had flapping ears, huge feet and gaping a
mouths.’’*? In short, Bland was a black Stephen Foster, as Foster was
a white Bland.

William Christopher Handy, who called himself Father of the
Blues, which is also the title of his autobiography, and whose career ; |
as a songwriter, instrumentalist, arranger, collector, editor, and mi
publisher extended into the mid-1950s, was involved with min- a
strelsy during the first 15 years of his musical life. At the age of 15, in
1888, he joined a singing quartet that was part of a hometown min-
strel show in Florence, Alabama. “I looked pretty funny,” Handy |
wrote in his autobiography,

stepping along with the ‘walking gents’ in my father’s Prince Albert. 7

We had seen the famous Georgia Minstrels in Florence, and we knew

how to make the pivot turns. We were all acquainted with Billy Ker- |

sands, the man who could make a mule laugh and we remembered his |

trick of proving on the stage that his enormous mouth would accom-

modate a cup anda saucer. We had seen Sam Lucas and Tom McIntosh f |

walking at the head of the parade in high silk hats and long-tailed im

coats.”’° |

Even though the troupe was stranded in Jasper, Tennessee, after
a few appearances and the manager skipped town, Handy’s feeling 4
for minstrelsy was not deflated. After working as a bandsman in

Henderson, Kentucky, he seized the opportunity to join W. A. Ma- im
hara’s Minstrels as cornetist, terming the day of his induction, Au- mm
gust 4, 1896, as “the big moment that was presently to shape my
course in life.’”’ He joined, even though “‘a large sector of upper-crust p
Negroes, including the family and friends of Elizabeth Price” (his |

j l
|
EE ————_————

--- Page 18 ---
34 “GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!”
future wife) viewed minstrels as “a disreputable lot.”°? His reason Like Eddie Lec-:
was that the best black talent of his generation became minstrels. famous blackface m=:
Soon he was onstage in the olio, a recognized cornet soloist; “lll Be True to Mi :
and, the following year, became the leader ofa band consisting of 30 cognomen by whic>
pieces in the parade and 42 in the night performances. It was a (1902), one of the z-=
glorious life of “a bright uniform, golden epaulettes, a gleaming silk musical The Defe.2#
topper,” excited, applauding audiences, and even a trip to Cuba°*— ing with Blanche ®-
which later accounted for his use of the habanera rhythm in his rated on “Summ:
famous “St. Louis Blues.” But it was also one fraught with dangers: Air-Ship,” an ear... =
white men who lynched a member of the troupe; cowboys who strel and songwrzé:
roped them during the morning parade; an Orange, Texas, mob that Lew Dockstz22-
would riddle the group’s Pullman car with bullets as it traveled strel-company c.~2
through town; threats of lynching and having the Pullman burned helped popularize =
when members of the troupe came down with smallpox. write, in about 1 =2=
Nevertheless, after a hiatus of two years when he served as known for his © >2.2
musical director at A and M College, Handy readily returned to inserted topica! | <a
Mahara’s Minstrels. Thinking back to those days, Handy remem- President Theoz:-23
bered them as “well spent,” a time that took him from Cuba to ing minstrelsv 2.:: = 2
California, from Canada to Mexico; that threw him into contact with superseded it ix 22a
“a wistful but aspiring generation of dusky singers and musicians,” OU aatele, |= a
and that “taught me a way of life that I consider the only one for opulent innova7: 7s:
me.””*° is about as pala:z>.4
When Eddie Leonard appeared in vaudeville, in about 1912, he sawdust with 2 =<:
was billed as The Last of the Great Minstrels. Others who were goodiskilled&:. --+s
among “‘the last” would include Lew Dockstader, in whose troupe out of it.’35
Leonard performed; George “Honey Boy” Evans; and, especially, What cor--:-1m
black Bert Williams, whose remarkable talent carried him high into cals within the =u
the Broadway theater as well as vaudeville, and whose work will be Primrose anc “=<
considered later. blackface co 2a
According to music publisher Edward B. Marks, Eddie Leonard only for one .:: 2." #
got his start in minstrelsy when he brought the young white hoofer to able to attrac: =e
the manager of Primrose and West Minstrels.°* Leonard was hired with his owr. 7-2 1
when he agreed to play the cymbals as well as dance. Early in that century, laurc>72a
association (1903), Leonard wrote “Tda (Sweet as Apple Cider),’’ the Minstrels. = —
song whose performance saved him when he was about to be fired. the last decz=: :c 4
Years later, a young Eddie Cantor (1892-1964), who became known minstrel com> 7.
as Mr. Banjo Eyes and married a girl whose name was Ida, scored pated in chan: 7am
with his imitations of Eddie Leonard’s rendition of the song. So dida Primrose anc ==
young Al Jolson, working in blackface with Lew Dockstader’s Min- so masterful = 2cKm
strels. By the time he wrote and introduced “(Roll Dem) Roly Boly Bland, view:7: = 2a
Eyes” in 1912, Leonard was working in vaudeville, and widely ac- law, his far). : —aa
knowledged for his dancing of the soft-shoe tap. He ultimately ap- his partner. “amd
peared on Broadway in a 1919 musical titled Roly Boly Eyes, in strels wher = =-sIm
which he sang “Ida” as well as the title song. formation c::--: > a
i r
; ht

--- Page 19 ---
)
“GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!” 35 |
Like Eddie Leonard, George “Honey Boy” Evans, another of the =
famous blackface minstrels, is remembered for two songs he wrote. |
“I'll Be True to My Honey Boy,” written in 1894, gave Evans the —
cognomen by which he is known. “In the Good Old Summertime” !
(1902), one of the great gang-songs of all time, was introduced in the |
musical The Defender, with Evans standing in the wings, harmoniz-
ing with Blanche Ring, the star. Evans and Shields, who collabo- |
rated on “Summertime,” also wrote “Come, Take a Trip on my
Air-Ship,” an early tribute to aviation. Despite his success as a min-
strel and songwriter, Evans, like James Bland, died poor. {
Lew Dockstader was a blackface performer as well as a min- {
strel-company owner. A writer of parodies and comic songs, he
helped popularize “Everybody Works but Father,” which he did not :
write, in about 1905. One of the last “stump speakers,”’ he became |
known for his “political” speeches, in which he skilfully always =
inserted topical local references, and for his hilarious imitation of =
President Theodore Roosevelt. He was much concerned with keep-
ing minstrelsy alive as a distinct form after variety and musicals had |
superseded it in popular favor.
“Minstrelsy in silk stockings,” he complained, referring to the 4
opulent innovations of competitors, “set in square cuts and big wigs _
is about as palatable as an amusementasa salad of pine shavings and 7
sawdust with a little salmon, lobster or chicken. . . . What is really /
good is killed by the surroundings. . . . They have refined all the fun |
out of it.’’”55

What competitors were doing was presenting variety and musi- |

cals within the framework of minstrelsy. When the famous troupe of |
Primrose and West broke apart, George Primrose, an outstanding /
blackface comedian, joined with Lew Dockstader. Although it was |
only for one lively summer at Hammerstein’s Victoria, they were P|
able to attract Eddie Leonardasa performer. Dockstader continued
with his own troupe almost into the second decade of the twentieth =
century, launching among other careers that of Al Jolson in 1909,5¢ _
Minstrelsy flourished as a popular form of entertainment into |

the last decade of the nineteenth century. One of the blackface |
minstrel companies that was quite popular in this era but partici-
pated in changes that anticipated the emergency of vaudeville was
Primrose and West. George Primrose, born Delaney in Canada, was ]
so masterful a dancer that (to recall the incident) a young James , |
Bland, viewing a performance, was inspired to turn away from the =
law, his family’s choice of profession, to minstrelsy. Primrose and j
his partner, William West, were both working with Haverly’s Min- 4
strels when a dispute over salary led to their departure and the _
formation of their own company in 1877. As Primrose and West, they 1
,

i!

if
B

--- Page 20 ---
36 “GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!”
were so successful that in time they became known as the Million- .
aires of Minstrelsy. ~~: el
The association of the company with an unusual number of very -_-- po
popular songs contributed to their renown. In 1884, tenor Banks ee
Winter introduced his own “‘White Wings,” a sentimental ballad that -+ a
soon was “sung, whistled, warbled, hummed, ground out by hurdy- ee
gurdies, banged on pianos and every other conceivable instru- 4. eel
ment,” according to Douglas Gilbert,>” and that became a request sles, aii
number for the rest of his career. In 1894, James Thornton’s popular Seas
tear-jerker, ‘‘She May Have Seen Better Days,” was effectively intro- acer
duced by minstrel R. H. Widom. —
The more significant development of 1894, and a novel depar- Sg pt
ture from minstrel procedures, was the first use of illustrated slides mS Tm
to present and dramatize a new song for the public. West opposed ——
the innovation. But publisher Edward B. Marks, who also wrote the —
lyrics of ‘The Little Lost Child,’ was so persuasive in discussions :
with George Primrose that the song was presented with a series of a
slides illustrating the sentimental story at the Grand Opera House, a
| on 23rd St. and Eighth Avenue, in New York, with tenor Alan May a osgiliead
| singing the song. As “The Little Lost Child” went on to sell a million HES
copies, other music publishers were soon using slide presentations —
with their new songs. ae ‘
The year 1902 found Primrose and West riding high with two ———
new hits. “Silver Threads among the Gold,” introduced first in 1873, oni ms
was revived by another silver-voiced tenor, Richard J. Jose, born in a
England but claimed by California as a native son. A minstrel with ds.
the Charlie Reed troupe and, later, Lew Dockstader, he also contrib- — a
uted to the popularity of ‘With All Her Faults I Love Her Still” (1888) ——
and “I Love You in the Same Old Way (Darling Sue)” (1896); but _ =
neither of these achieved the popularity of ‘Silver Threads,”’ which —
eventually sold over three million copies. The second Primrose and _— =, ed
West hit of 1902 was “‘Oh, Didn’t He Ramble,” written by Bob Cole vicar
and Rosamond Johnson under the pseudonym Will Handy, intro- seal
duced by George Primrose, and, in time, a favorite of black bands on —
the way home from a funeral. > orem
When Lew Dockstader lamented the sacrifice of fun to refine- —_—
ment in the minstrel show, it was in reference to developments Fee g
pioneered by Primrose and West. Impressed by the success of a -—, 2
British minstrel company (Sam Hague’s) in which performers ap- ——"
peared in full evening dress and only the end men were in blackface, —
Primrose and West experimented with white minstrelsy and a cast —
dressed in Shakespearean costumes. By then, the company was —
known as Thatcher, Primrose and West, and it shortly presented a ee
Black Mikado, which ran for two years, 1884-1886. - a
ee , ae

--- Page 21 ---
_—_ B
“GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!” 37 |
| i
A photograph included in a program of the period—
presumably the late 1880s — bears the inscription, “A New Depar- 4
ture: Modern Minstrelsy in Kingly Splendor.’’58 Arranged ina large
semicircle are 23 performers, attired in elegant colonial vests and 7
britches, with no less than 5 Mr. Boneses on the left end and 5 Mr. /
Tambos on the right end. Except for these 10 performers in black- |
face, the rest are white. Seated behind this semicircle, in a raised |
semicircular box, there is an orchestra of strings, woodwinds, and
brass, adding up to 21 musicians. By this time, apparently, other |
latter-day minstrel troupes were making limited use of blackface, ”
low comedy, and plantation settings and material, and concentrat-
ing on lavish productions, Of these, as of the Thatcher, Primrose and |
West presentations, it could be said, as the Clipper wrote of the Sam rl
Hague Minstrels: it was “more like a high class ballad or operatic i
concert than a minstrel show.’’59 | |
It has been customary to regard vaudeville as a descendant of a
the olio segment of the minstrel show. The attribution of paternity is
understandable — if questionable—since the olio, not unlike ;
vaudeville, consisted of a series of specialty acts. Of course, there
was a difference in that the performers in the olio were part of a {
troupe, not disparate acts, each traveling and performing sepa-
rately. But the fact is that the minstrel show itself underwent a
transformation in which its basic character changed. By the late
1880s, it was a minstrel show largely in name and, except for some Z
vestigial elements, was really a variety or vaudeville show. a
A sign of the change was J. H. Haverly’s United Mastodon Min- a
strels, whose expanded personnel was blazoned in posters, playbills,
and newspapers as consisting of “FORTY —40— COUNT ’EM — 40 Z
— FORTY!” The enlarged cast was itself an indication of an elabo-
rate production, flamboyant curtains, colorful sets, expensive cos-
tumes, and exotic themes. When Haverly bought the San Francisco -
Minstrels in the winter of 1883 - 1884, eliminating the last resident I
minstrel company in New York, a city that had once boasted dozens -
of minstrel troupes,© the disappearance of minstrelsy as it had @
flourished for 40 years was a reality. i
Haverly has been described as the greatest minstrel entrepre- =
neur and as a promoter and empire-builder of P. T. Barnum propor- :
tions. By 1881 he was the owner of an empire that embraced two
large white minstrel companies and the biggest black troupe, four
touring comedy theater groups, and six theaters, three in New York
and one each in Brooklyn, Chicago, and San Francisco. a
The modifications he made in the traditional minstrel show a
were the product, not of personal quirks, but of several Socioeco- =
nomic factors. Decisive was the expansion of the American econ- |
| /
|

--- Page 22 ---
38 “GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!”
omy in the post- Civil War era, with the growth of population, trans- sham, romantic <.. =
portation, and cities. Like other phases of the economy, minstrelsy strels had foistec -- 4
was drawn into the Gilded Age trends toward large-scale enterprise black portravals =:
and the elimination and absorption of small companies. Moreover, troupes. As the 21z:6 =
the rise and growth of black minstrelsy, admired for its ethnic au- life, the white blz: ze
thenticity in depicting plantation life in comparison with the burnt- and new subjec:s =
cork brigade, compelled the white minstrel companies to move in variety.
the direction of visually exciting settings and dazzling specialty acts. In histories -- %
Reacting also to the competition of other types of entertainment, achieved an ur. 2-23
suchas drama, opera, and variety, and feeling that the minstrel show the song “All Cc :-s L
had not grown with the economy, Haverly was motivated to estab- the pejorative a>: =-3
lish a minstrel troupe that ‘for extraordinary excellence, merit and be considered ¢: .=-.
magnitude will astonish and satisfy the most exacting seeker in the chapter). Overl¢ : +s £21
world.’* enjoyed asanac::- sm
Inevitably, outsized extravaganzas and grandiose spectacles be- ades before his -2:-7.
came the order of the day. As the first-part finale ofan 1880 program, Born Ernes: *.2um
Haverly offered ‘‘a magnificent scene representing a Turkish Bar- worked as a mir s-—=
baric Palace in Silver and Gold.”® In the mid-1880s, Haverly pre- Minstrels. The s-- =z =m
sented a Colossal Japanese Show, including jugglers, tumblers, ne- 1896 and that c2_s-z j
cromancers, all ostensibly brought from the Court Theatre of his high gear. He wz: scam
Imperial Majesty, the Mikado of Japan. (1898), the pat--- - =a
The cost of mounting these lavish productions forced the min- Dunbar (1872-.-'" ;
strels of the late nineteenth century to become traveling companies. (1869-1944), >.
Resident troupes could not achieve the long runs required to amor- New York. In t=: =:
tize costs, while one-nighters in the larger cities provided a substan- popular: ““Whc =: Sa
tial source of revenue. The smaller resident companies could not Tonight,” and =: —=
meet the competition, and went out of business or were bought out On leavire 2 7
by the empire-builders, as Haverly had done in New York City with the famous B!z:: =a
the San Francisco Minstrels, who had presented a traditional min- Black Patti hers:- am
strel show, beginning in May 1865, for 19 years. bleached Ame-:z-. ‘1
What Haverly was doing with his blackface Mastodons was in ria Theater, it 2: wa
part the result of what he was doing with his Colored Minstrels. The returned to m:-s--=m
latter presented “‘The Darky as He Is at Home, Darky Life in the Curtis’s Afro-A~ =~ 2am
Cornfields, Canebreak, Barnyard and on the Levee and Flatboat.’’® Australia and Ez an
For the traditional semicircle opening of his blackface minstrels, waiian comec:: =~ .amy
Haverly substituted picturesque nonplantation settings. From the Gus Hill to fira-:: =m
earliest black troupe, there had been an emphasis on “genuine plan- pany, in which >= sag
tation darkies from the South,” so that critics and audiences began Washington Bu...:-. @
to feel ‘there is nothing like the natural thing. . . .A Negrocan play sical with a bo: ». ==amm
Negro peculiarities much more satisfactorily than the white ‘artist,’ Marion Cook, =:; -i7m
who with burnt cork is at best a base imitator.”** Negroes depicted Rufus Rastus. 2 = 1
plantation life, said the New York Clipper,” with greater fidelity than which he wre:s -# 4
any ‘poor white trash’ with corked faces can do.”’® Wouldn’t Tha: =: : 2
In actuality, the black minstrels were really recapitulating the By 1907 ki = wy

--- Page 23 ---
‘
“GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!” 39
'
sham, romantic illusion of plantation life that the blackface min- |
strels had foisted on the public. But the belief in the authenticity of
black portrayals worked to the disadvantage of the blackface q
troupes. As the black companies offered their versions of plantation
life, the white blackface troupes were moved to seek out new locales -
and new subjects; in short, they were driven in the direction of =
variety.

In histories of American popular music, Ernest Hogan has
achieved an unwanted notoriety as the guilt-ridden black author of |
the song “‘All Coons Look Alike to Me,” the content of which belies |
the pejorative and prejudiced implication of the title. (The song will 7
be considered at length in the section on ‘“‘coon songs,” in the next -
chapter). Overlooked in the Hogan accounts is the notable career he | i
enjoyed as an actor/singer/composer/producer for almost two dec- | |
ades before his death.

Born Ernest Reuber Crowder in Bowling Green, Kentucky, he a
worked as a minstrel end man in Richard and Pringle’s Georgia :
Minstrels. The song that became a runaway hit on its publication in Zs
1896 and that caused him so much travail also sent his career into
high gear. He was starred in Clorindy, or the Origin of the Cakewalk
(1898), the path-breaking operetta by poet/author Paul Laurence s
Dunbar (1872-1906) and composer/producer Will Marion Cook
(1869-1944), which was presented at the Casino Roof Garden in
New York. In this, he sang a number of ‘‘coon” songs that became rl
popular: ‘Who Dat Say Chicken in Dis Crowd,” “Darktown Is Out BB
Tonight,” and “Hottest Coon in Dixie.”

On leaving Clorindy, he succeeded Cole and Johnson as star of -
the famous Black Patti Troubadours, receiving equal billing with
Black Patti herself and being featured opposite her as the “Un- 7
bleached American.” Later, when he played Hammerstein’s Victo-
ria Theater, it was as a headliner, at a high figure. Nevertheless, he -
returned to minstrelsy in the 1899-1900 season, touring with -
Curtis’s Afro-American Minstrels and being received vociferously in @
Australia and Hawaii. With his partner of the Australian and Ha- _
waiian comedic triumphs, Billy McLain (1866-1949), he persuaded =
Gus Hill to finance the organization of the Original Smart Set Com-
pany, in which he successfully created the character of George ; |
Washington Bullion. After starring in Uncle Eph’s Christmas, a mu-
sical with a book again by Paul Laurence Dunbar and music by Will 4
Marion Cook, his career reached a new height with the lead role in t |
Rufus Rastus, a Hurtig and Seamon production of 1905-1906, for | |
which he wrote the songs and that yielded the hit, “Oh, Say, _—
Wouldn’t That Be a Dream.” ;

By 1907 he was working on The Oyster Man, which he hoped |
=
4
:
1
ee

--- Page 24 ---
40 “GENTLEMEN, BE SEATED!”
would be his crowning production. He staged the work, collabo-
rated on the music, and, assisted by Millerand Lyles, two performing
creators fresh out of Chicago’s famous Pekin Stock Company, wrote
the book. Starring with the noted comic John Rucker (1866-19—),
he won accolades from the critics. By the time the show opened, he
was ill from overwork, and left it briefly early in 1908. Returning
shortly, he collapsed on the stage of the Globe Theater in Boston.
Gravely concerned, producers Hurtig and Seamon sent him for a
rest to the mountains. He never returned, dying in 1909, at the age of
50.
Ernest Hogan’s creative journey, from minstrel end man to the
star of pioneer black musicals, departing from the minstrel frame-
work and ingredients, embodies changes that were occurring in
black entertainment. While minstrelsy itself was being trans-
formed, from it sprouted new theatrical styles like variety and
vaudeville, as well as new musical styles, including Ragtime, ‘“‘coon”’
songs, and the cakewalk.
When the =>:
York City == |
in which :-=
Marion C:74
competit:. 2
current p22
“The Hoes:
the duo staz
the “Two Re:
concomiltar.:
and the rise
Unquesz
Hogan’s “A.
year (1896 =
Harney’s Sf:
Your Nigger
embody the =
of a broker .
lover who sr
the comme>
