--- Page 1 ---
ns |)
The Real Thing
DAVID KRASNER
I’m the real thing
é I dance and sing.
—AIDA OVERTON WALKER,
j “I Wants to Be an Actor Lady”
(1903)
“We finally decided that as white men with blackfaces were billing them-
ij selves ‘coons,” wrote the performer George Walker of the Williams and
Walker Theatrical Company in 1906, “Williams and Walker would do well
i to bill themselves the ‘Two Real Coons,’ and so we did.” Walker and his
1 partner, Bert Williams, did indeed “do well,” becoming the dominant black
i theatrical company from 1899 to 1909. Their productions of In Dahomey,
j (1902-5), Abyssinia (1905-7), and Bandanna Land (1907-9) were among
the most bankable musical vaudeville shows on Broadway.’ At the peak of
their career, George Walker reported the company’s payroll at $2,300 per
week, making them one of the most successful companies of the time.? In
i Dahomey attained success in London during its 1903 tour, and the com-
i pany maintained successful engagements from there.* Capitalizing on the
2 “coon song” craze, Williams and Walker appropriated the term “coon” and
| applied it to their show. The script for Two Real Coons has been lost, but the
7 idea of being the “real coons” was not lost on black performers. Williams
and Walker, and their friend and rival Robert “Bob” Cole and his company,
Cole and Johnson, displayed throughout their writings and actions an acute
awareness of the “real” as a cultural signifier and marketing tool.
For Williams and Walker and Cole and Johnson, interest in the real
as a commercial device made it possible to break mainstream show busi-
ness’s color barrier. The real enticed white audiences because realism was
in vogue. For the educated white bourgeoisie of the late nineteenth century,
| historian T. J. Jackson Lears contends, “authentic experience of any sort
: 99

--- Page 2 ---
—

seemed ever more elusive; life seemed increasingly confined to the airless stereotype. But some per
parlor of material comfort and moral complacency. Many yearned to smash Overton Walker, skillfully
the glass and breathe freely—to experience ‘real life’ in all its intensity.”® so contiibutad tothe —
Being quite cognizant of this fact, black performers sought to contrast their hegemonic and racist dep’
“realness” with white imitation. White minstrelsy’s “seeming counterfeit,” whites. The notion of “aur
Eric Lott’s coinage describing a “contradictory popular construction that serves recognition as an i

was not so much true or false as more or less pleasurable or politically effi- tural paradigms.
cacious in the culture that braced it,’* was dissolving. Although blackface In this essay I will at
would be revived in Hollywood from the 1920s to the 1940s, by the turn of American culture: First 7
the century America’s interest in racial “counterfeiting” waned, replaced the reel ware to be. a oul
by an obsession with the real. The “real thing’—-to co-opt the period’s jar- seaming Walker's sucacx
gon—signified what Miles Orvell calls the “tension between imitation and Walker contributed signi:
authenticity,” which “has been a key constituent in American culture since be known in contempora:
the Industrial Revolution and assumes critical importance in the shift from to locate and analyze sor
the nineteenth to the twentieth centuries that we have called—in all its en- Thenew “realism” atte
compassing multiplicity—modernism.” Orvell adds that the emphasis on +0 bot whar wag real anc
realism eventuated popular productions that “catered increasingly to a taste liams and Walker and C-
for lifelike imitation that floated easily over the border between life and art. stage “coon” that they ex
It was an excess of such theatrical representation—which might include monplace by nonblack ac:
everything from real food eaten on stage to real horses used to enact battle performer's attempt to cz
scenes”—that reflected “the taste for realism in literature.”” When black per- to black culture. By the e=
formers created “life and art” by putting on the “coon” mask and attaching to adopt the stage conve:
the term “real” to it, they complicated (and contributed to) the semiotics of use of blackface makeup —
realism in American culture. traditions. To function =:
Following Toni Morrison’s call for a “re-interpretation of the American to dow blackdace and se:
canon,”® I hope to show that African American performers played a critical pandering to their audiez
role in defining American culture at the turn of the century. Emphasis on mining the derogatorv im
realism in America at the time was certainly broad, but the significance of tion of the Dleckfaw ste
black performers’ contributions to this cultural event has largely gone un- As a result of this comz.
noticed. Black performers are rarely mentioned in studies of how American in stereotyping and su>*
realism took root? This disparity is due at least in part to the negative value joined in the creation o? :
judgment labeling realism retrograde. Such condemnation is exemplified were a force in making =:
by Amy Kaplan, who remarks that from “a progressive force exposing the However mucirthis rege
conditions of industrial society, realism has turned into a conservative force tract from their cultura. -
whose very act of exposure reveals its complicity with structures of power.”?° For black performers.
I shall argue, however, that realism by black performers was a tactic used to challenge against mins-
dismantle the structures of power. been denied participat!:=
Not all black performers opposed what was then the status quo; in fact, commodities they owne:
the use of the blackface mask by black performers perpetuated the accepted of the 1890s, blacks ju=:-

100 DAVID KRASNER

--- Page 3 ---
~~ s ie)
stereotype. But some performers, especially George Walker’s wife, Aida
- Overton Walker, skillfully manipulated the prevailing reality and in doing
so contributed to the creation of a revised American realism. She countered
: hegemonic and racist depictions by exploiting the desire for the real among
| whites. The notion of “authenticity” displayed in her cakewalking dance de-
: serves recognition as an imaginative and constructive employment of cul-
- tural paradigms.
= In this essay I will attempt to shed light on Walker’s role in shaping
= American culture. First I will provide background by accounting for how
: the real came to be a cultural signifier and marketing tactic. Then I will
- examine Walker’s success in marketing herself as the “real” cakewalker.
: Walker contributed significantly to an enduring strategy that has come to
= be known in contemporary parlance as “crossover appeal.” The goal here is
= to locate and analyze some of the roots of this appeal.
- The new “realism” at the turn of the century was paradoxical in its appeal
~ to both what was real and what was not. The theatrical companies of Wil-
= liams and Walker and Cole and Johnson were black, but the fixture of the
= stage “coon” that they embodied was a theatricalized portrayal made com-
= monplace by nonblack actors. Minstrelsy was the nineteenth-century white
A performer’s attempt to create a slippery reality superficially related at best
fe to black culture. By the end of the nineteenth century black performers had
= to adopt the stage convention—especially the debasing yet indispensable
e use of blackface makeup—in order to attract audiences demanding minstrel
traditions. To function successfully, even to survive, black performers had
= to don blackface and satisfy white expectations of black buffoonery. While
a. pandering to their audiences, black performers negotiated ways of under-
= mining the derogatory image." Still the price was high, given the perpetua-
a tion of the blackface stereotype even among those who found it offensive.
a As a result of this complex mixture of the real and unreal, of complicity
= in stereotyping and subverting it, African American performers not only
<2 joined in the creation of a new “realism” in American art and culture, they
eS were a force in making realism a major component of American aesthetics.
ae However much this realism might be unreal—even surreal —it does not de-
2 tract from their cultural contributions.
ba For black performers, the real was commodified in order to lead the
eS challenge against minstrel theater. At a time when African Americans had
been denied participation in a growing economy, blacks sold one of the few
oo commodities they owned: “realness.” Like the Buffalo Bill Wild West shows
a of the 1890s, blacks jumped on the bandwagon of the “authenticity” phe-
The Real Thing 101

--- Page 4 ---
nomena while exploiting the euphoria over realness. Buffalo Bill Cody had we must give them the real n
enticed the masses with his extravaganza replete with “real” cowboys and 1906. “We know that when v
Indians, rodeo, and reenactments of battle scenes onstage that recreated have us; there are enough ba
the adventures of the Great Plains. Most of all, Cody advertised the produc- ping of racial identity and aut
tions as not merely Wild West shows, but as resurrections of the Wild West which to explain its popularit
itself, Cody and his producing partner, Nate Salsbury, realized that audi- atrical and business people, w
ences would pay to see dramatized portrayals of the “real” West, provided ably disposed to commercializ
that what passed for real was a carefully chosen performance that concealed stories about it. George Walk
much of the truth2? Following Cody’s success Salsbury produced another ner, Bert Williams, and his us'
“reality” show, Black America, a reenactment of the plantation that opened comedians: “Black-faced whi:
in Brooklyn in 1895.1° Although it was hardly as successful as his Wild West ridiculous as they could when
endeavor, Salsbury followed the same promotional strategy: resurrect the result” of such performances,
“real.” Savvy marketers took advantage of the “authentic” by turning enter- performers in their make-up
tainment into big business and the real into something appealing. Thomas were replicating other whites
Postlewait writes that “both entertainment and advertising learned how to black realty. Bert Williams. :
deliver the hyperreal, the domain of desires.”* Producers Salsbury, P. T. Bar- race to attempt to delineate <
num, B. F. Keith, Florenz Ziegfeld, the Shubert brothers, and the Frohman much of his success is due «:
brothers, along with film moguls Samuel Goldwyn and the rising depart- was able to avoid white mins
ment store empires of Walgreens, Woolworth’s, Macy’s, Jordan Marsh, Mar- turn of phrase apropos of th
shall Field’s, and the Sears, Roebuck and Montgomery Ward catalogues, “in a perfectly natural way" «
created visual splendor and commercial spectacle that merged theater and of “reality.” It is show busines
the marketplace during the Gilded Age. Robert Ogden, Wanamaker’s part- find some primordially auth
ner and superintendent of the New York department store, put it best when is, as Plato cautioned in Bocx
in 1897 he said, “I have no doubt whatever that the high priests of art would However, the success of Wi
sneer at the statement that art in advertising is art for humanity’s sake; but, Murray, incorporating the pe
nevertheless, such is the case, and humanity benefits by the art that is ex- Colored American Magazine :
pended upon advertising, and the benefits include the artist himself and the up as they have mounted, hu=
audience to which he appeals.” Jettisoning “art for art’s sake,” he averred: a most convincing manner, >.
“art belongs to commerce; it must be connected with practical things.” and the shallow crust of Arce
Black performers appear to have heeded this advice by merging art and natural by Walker and othe:
cornmerce. promotion of racial equaliz.
The advent of marketing and realism was fortuitous, and black per- stream marketplace. The dez
formers made the most of it. Remarking on Williams and Walker’s perfor- simplifies the picture and s2
mance of A Lucky Coon during its first tour of England in 1899, the Wash- cans. The story of African A:
ington, D.C., Colored American reported that “Williams & Walker are the complex and involved, taxiz.
only two ‘real coons’ (as they facetiously style themselves) who ever had the formation of turn-of-the-ce=
honor of appearing before royalty while in Europe.”?6 Williams and Walker ence of American race relaz-
and Cole and Johnson advertised the “fact” that they were “coons”— albeit gies begun by George Walxe:
coyly. “I attribute our success to our knowledge that to please an audience Walker remain relevant buz :
102 DAVID KRASNER >

--- Page 5 ---
ie... oo
i

25 i we must give them the real negro character,’ wrote George Walker around
of. t 1906. “We know that when we try to act like white folks, the public won’t
eS : have us; there are enough bad white actors now.”!” The complicated map-
oe i ping of racial identity and authenticity suggests many vantage points from
S87 ; which to explain its popularity. Black actors and producers, like other the-
ie j atrical and business people, were obsessive self-publicists. They were favor-
cel t ably disposed to commercialization of realness, even going so far as to invent
a i stories about it. George Walker, for example, extolled the skills of his part-
ber k ner, Bert Williams, and his use of blackface by comparing Williams to white
mee. i comedians: “Black-faced white comedians used to make themselves look as
Test 4 ridiculous as they could when portraying a ‘darky’ character.” The “one fatal
ie result” of such performances, he claimed, “was that they imitated the white
ware performers in their make-up as ‘darkies.’” In other words, for Walker, whites
2s ' were replicating other whites, creating characters having no connection to
» 28 i black realty. Bert Williams, however, “is the first man that I know of our
Sas | race to attempt to delineate a ‘darky’ in a perfectly natural way, and I think
in ' much of his success is due to this fact.”"® Williams, according to Walker,
ucts was able to avoid white minstrelsy because he was “original and natural,” a
foe. i turn of phrase apropos of the era’s cultural lexicon. The paradox of acting
LES, i “in a perfectly natural way” while donning blackface is hardly an expression
a : of “reality.” It is show business hyperbole and a form of masking. Trying to
ase find some primordially authentic, natural identity through representation
an is, as Plato cautioned in Book X of The Republic, a tenuous illusion at best.
23 i However, the success of Williams and Walker did not go unnoticed. R. C.
So, Murray, incorporating the period’s emphasis on racial uplift, wrote in the
: tae Colored American Magazine in 1905 that “Williams and Walker have pulled
Dene up as they have mounted, hundreds of their kind, and have demonstrated in
Ted: a most convincing manner, both the persevering ability of the colored actor
ie j and the shallow crust of American prejudice.”’® The use of the real and the
| ini natural by Walker and others cannot be easily dismissed; as a tool for the

promotion of racial equality, it served to establish a presence in the main-
sez stream marketplace. The depiction of realism as one-sidedly conservative
ai 5 \ simplifies the picture and suppresses the contributions by African Ameri-
Bet , cans. The story of African American contributions to American realism is
abies complex and involved, taking place as it does amid the turbulent trans-
3 ste formation of turn-of-the-century modernism and the ever-evolving conflu-
nose: ence of American race relations. For better or worse, the ideas and strate-
pagel gies begun by George Walker, Bert Williams, Bob Cole, and Aida Overton
ence Walker remain relevant but are yet to be fully appreciated or understood.

| The Real Thing 103

ie

--- Page 6 ---
Marketing the Real, Selling the Race says, “Blacks may have t
ated for them; they may
The complex interconnection of authenticity, race, and commodification purposes.”?3
at the turn of the century converges at its focal point in American mod- This was evident int:
ernism. The transition from Victorianism (ca. 1870s-1880s) to modernism of blackface minstrels
provided a threshold through which black performers could cross, yet it any vaudeville show, bla
also brought with it considerable humility. Such was the case of the per- (Spike Lee's film Bamboz
former Ernest Hogan, who produced his 1895 vaudeville show All Coons turn of the century were
Look Alike to Me by marketing the lead song of the same title. According to they lived a conflicting ~
a 1930 retrospective on Hogan in the Baltimore Afro-American, “All Coons were often at odds. I hav
Look Alike to Me” had “a beautiful melody, as many who recall the song will scribed framework estab
attest, and while the words were quite innocuous the title became a byword to negotiate between rer
and an epithet of derision, and Hogan never forgot it.”?° The 1895 song and ness fixed in the minds co
show likely influenced the decision of Williams and Walker to title their performers were keenly
shows A Lucky Coon and Two Real Coons (from 1900 onward they dropped and often contradictory. :
“eon” from their titles). Regrettably the term “coon” had market value; Bob tion”24 This Du Boisian
Cole’s 1898 A Trip to Coontown, for instance, evoked a show that used the Fanon’s observation that
“eoon” vocabulary and continued a stage convention. In 7 he Last Darky, object in the midst of ot!
Louis Chude-Sokei observes that for Williams and Walker (as well as other described in a proverb Be
performers) “the African American stereotype had been filtered through one mind fuh white folks
many generations of white impersonation; only their own racial authen- The late nineteenth c
ticity could be used as an edge in the ‘mimic warfare’ of vaudeville.”?? The pacting black entertainr
turf for this warfare was theater, where the authentic and the real would be tion of Jim Crow segreg:
exploited for tactical advantage. ship for African Americ:
The idea of African Americans “selling” themselves as performers is self-help agenda, rallied -
hardly new. “Selling blackness,” Harry J. Elam reminds us, “conjures images sufficiency. Many black |
of the auction block and black bodies sold to the highest white bidder. In the ington, who advocated +
arena of slavery, the auction block compelled restricted, distorted perfor- According to Washingtor
mances of blackness where any display of black agency raised concerns, and fits such as educational «
blackness became understood only in terms of white desire and black eco- Exposition address, Was
nomic utility.”2? Despite the deplorable conditions of slavery and its after- where you are,’ i.e., create
math, the dynamics of theater has historically highlighted the conflict be- stacles. “Our greatest dar
tween a performer’s desire for agency on the one hand and an audience’s to freedom we may over|:
insistence on convention on the other. Elam is correct, however, insofar as productions of our hands
blacks often sought ways of asserting their self-determination even as audi- proportion as we learn to
ences impelled them to act in a reified manner. Whites, writes Ellis Cash- and skill into the comm:
more, “having material, if not moral, power sufficient to dictate the ebb and as we learn to draw the
flow of plantation life, would have had the ability to impose certain condi- the ornamental gewgaws
tions.” As these conditions evolved in the early twentieth century, Cashmore remarks that, for Washin
104 DAVID KRASNER

--- Page 7 ---
i. ————
says, “Blacks may have been consciously playing the roles whites had cre-
ated for them; they may also have been manipulating images for expedient
purposes.”?3

This was evident in the use of blackface by black performers. The mask
of blackface minstrelsy was so embedded into the American psyche that
| any vaudeville show, black or white, without a “coon” mask was sure to fail
1 (Spike Lee's film Bamboozled makes this point well). Black performers at the
7 turn of the century were aware of the legacy of minstrelsy and realized that
7 they lived a conflicting “double consciousness” where desire and demands
were often at odds. I have noted elsewhere that “performing within a pre-
scribed framework established by whites in blackface, black performers had
to negotiate between representations of self, and representations of black-
: ness fixed in the minds of audiences accustomed to white caricatures. Black
4 performers were keenly aware of this paradox, which created a complex,
‘ and often contradictory, relationship between performance and representa-
} tion.”?* This Du Boisian double consciousness was summoned up in Franz
‘ Fanon’s observation that despite his desire to assert his selfhood he was “an
| object in the midst of other objects.” The dual consciousness has also been
described in a proverb Bernard Bell’s grandfather was fond of reciting: “Got
f one mind fuh white folks to see, ‘nother fuh what I know’s me.”?5
i The late nineteenth century coincided with two significant events im-
pacting black entertainment: the end of Reconstruction and the legaliza-
tion of Jim Crow segregation. Both conditions resulted in economic hard-
} ship for African Americans. Blacks, influenced by Booker T. Washington’s
i self-help agenda, rallied to combat poverty through labor and a sense of self-
i sufficiency. Many black performers were enthusiastic followers of Wash-
i ington, who advocated economic advancement through manual labor.?®
i According to Washington, once economic parity was achieved, other bene-
\ fits such as educational equality would accrue. In his famous 1895 Atlanta
| Exposition address, Washington urged blacks to “cast down your buckets
where you are,’ i.e., create business and economic opportunities despite ob-
| | stacles. “Our greatest danger,” he said, “is that in the great leap from slavery
to freedom we may overlook the fact that the masses of us are to live by the
productions of our hands, and fail to keep in mind that we shall prosper in
proportion as we learn to dignify and glorify common labor, and put brains
t and skill into the common occupation of life; shall prosper in proportion
i as we learn to draw the line between the superficial and the substantial,
the ornamental gewgaws of life and the useful.”2” Historian Sven Beckert
| remarks that, for Washington, freedom “rested on economic power.” To re-
The Real Thing 105
—_ eae

--- Page 8 ---
main free, Beckert maintains, “people of African heritage had to become tinued to grow, with the ne:
part of the global capitalist economy, of ‘civilization’ in Washington’s words, upsurge. The unemployme:
while retaining their ability to provide for themselves independently.’”* capita income rose nearly 2.
Washington's separation of the utilitarian and the frivolous would subse- World War I. Overall, from t
quently impact black performers. Furthermore, his emphasis on capitalism War I, within one generatic
and useful productivity was, I believe, at the root of the decision to use the jumped by nearly two-third:
term “coon” despite its negative connotation. America boasted of bein:
African American actors realized that their best chance of theatri- available for the ambitious :
cal mainstream commercial success rested on two principles: talent and the phoenix from nothing to
marketing. Talent they had in abundance; but the marketing of and for rapacity encouraged indivic
black theater had by this time been hardwired into America’s psyche. Min- and many made their fortu
strelsy’s stereotypic caricature produced a seemingly endless parade of political scientist James E.
white actors who stepped into the gestures of an American minstrel arche- viduals to pursue goals anc
type—T. D. Rice’s Jim Crow caricature is famous for this— portraying rec- ture replete with “how-to”
ognizable and derogatory features. During the nineteenth century white man.” “Every man for himss
actors in blackface were an accepted artifice; this theatrical convention en- social scientist David Welis |
dured in the public’s imagination even through the twentieth century. How indeed explosion—led to a :
to free black theater from white control became the circumambient con- in turn led to an increase in
cern of African American performers. However, early twentieth-century system combined with the -<
performers had experienced what many performers encounter even now: a middle class. The idea of 22.
perceived need to appeal to white audiences. With such acquiescence came example—had a profounc ::
financial success, despite the objection of African Americans who were made their mark in the hu->
strongly opposed to the images of minstrel derogation and superficial dis- excitement was evidenced =-
port. ing individuals to “get up 2=
Amid the heady times of venture capitalism that arose in the late 1890s, in his 1878 book, Getting -~
black performers were caught in a bind: they needed to advertise to suc- is power,” added Russell E. .
ceed, but they also needed to assuage fears of middle-class blacks who con- How Men and Women Mea: =
sidered their work an abetting of racism. Additionally, the appearance of de- be within one’s grasp: “Your >
partment stores fed a burgeoning consumerism that had found its way into these pages; perhaps wit=:= ;
world’s fairs, hotels and museums, film, magazines, and tourism.?° Turn-of- all the wealth your heart sz: ~
the-century industrialization resulted in nearly everyone across the politi- Inventiveness, diligence. an:
cal spectrum and up and down the economic ladder embracing free-market way transportation rushe: :
credos. Commercialization was transforming economies, and they in turn tered overnight wealth: 2=:
were transforming the world. A “deep-going change in the capitalist mode the Rockefellers, and J. 2.
of production and exchange,” writes Martin J. Sklar, “represented a new These were new business |=:
stage in the development of market society.”°° The pace of industrialization with them a sense of adve-—
accelerated, notably in the rapid spread of mass production, oil refineries, Successful Men of Toda: =~.
pipelines, retail chains, bigger and faster railroads, and the emerging tele- “‘sticktoitiveness’ is ofte- — =
phone system. Following the depression of 1893 to 1896, the economy con- Passivity was shunned. 227: «
106 DAVID KRASNER -

--- Page 9 ---
er or"
tinued to grow, with the next two decades experiencing an unprecedented
upsurge. The unemployment rate remained close to 4 percent, and per
capita income rose nearly 2.5 percent a year from 1896 to the beginning of
World War I. Overall, from the late nineteenth century to the end of World
War I, within one generation, Americans’ average standard of living had
jumped by nearly two-thirds.

America boasted of being the “land of opportunity,” where success was
available for the ambitious and plucky. Entrepreneurs reported rising like
the phoenix from nothing to become powerful kings of industry. Gilded Age
rapacity encouraged individuals to seize upon any available opportunity,
and many made their fortunes. The “theology of the free market,” writes

political scientist James E. Block, demanded the “moral liberty” of indi-
' viduals to pursue goals and pioneer invention.®? This resulted in a litera-
ture replete with “how-to” books and articles embracing the “self-made
man.” “Every man for himself, and the Devil take the hindermost,’ noted
social scientist David Wells in 1875.3? The nation’s industrial revolution—
. indeed explosion—led to a growth in new methods of distribution, which
| in turn led to an increase in marketing. Individual liberty in a free-market
| system combined with the reorganization of market forces resulted in a new
| middle class. The idea of advertising one’s goods—in the Sears catalog, for
example—had a profound impact on the American way of life. As people
; made their mark in the hurly-burly of capitalism, the consequences of this
i excitement was evidenced by the boom in manifestos and pamphlets urg-
! ing individuals to “get up and go.” “Life is action,’ wrote William Mathews
in his 1878 book, Getting on in the World: Hints of Success in Life. “Money
i is power,” added Russell H. Conwell in his 1890 book, Acres of Diamonds:
t How Men and Women May Become Rich, and the key to success was said to
be within one’s grasp: “Your wealth is close to the spot where you sit to read
i these pages; perhaps within your fingers’ reach. . . . Not far from you now is
all the wealth your heart should desire, and more than you will ever need.”?4
‘ Inventiveness, diligence, and fortitude were terms of the new zeitgeist. Rail-
‘ way transportation rushed goods across the nation; new inventions fos-
tered overnight wealth; and captains of industry such as the Vanderbilts,
the Rockefellers, and J. P. Morgan became worthy of youthful emulation.
i These were new business leaders whose endurance and plentitude brought
i with them a sense of adventure. Wilbur F. Crafts, in his popular 1883 book,
| Successful Men of Today and What They Say of Success, announced that
i “sticktoitiveness’ is often mentioned as the essential condition of success.”?5
i Passivity was shunned, and laziness was deemed immoral; only those who
The Real Thing 107
eget BO
ge —

--- Page 10 ---
took the initiative would reap the rewards. “Don't wait for your opportunity. “adorn” The product he
Make it? urged Orison Swett Marden in his book, Pushing to the Front: Or, beriaedfle a6 well. ag ole.
Success Under Difficulties: “The giants of the race have been men of con- would be marketed wou
centration, who have struck sledge-hammer blows in one place until they authenticity using rhetc
have accomplished their purpose. The successful men of to-day are men of itself and not just the m
single and intense purpose.”** Amid this euphoric rush to wealth, marketing be invented, but it also
strategies abounded. and performance. White
Like everyone else, blacks wanted their rightful share. However, the door equipped to sell it— “rez
to opportunity was not only shut, it was slammed shut. In its 1896 Plessy v. Black performers, .A
Ferguson decision the Supreme Court ruled that “separate but equal” facili- what Thorstein Veblen -
ties were constitutional, thereby allowing institutions and individuals to well-known 1899 book.
institute racial segregation unimpeded. This decision had enormous con- the sort of portal throu:
sequences, none more devastating than its economic impact on the black fil “tawestors”™ Aseardir
community. Social historian Nikhil Pal Singh has commented that racism for people not merely tc
“operates at the level of market activity and so-called private life, where order to gain and to hc
blacks have been prevented both formally and informally from acting as merely to possess weal:
proprietors of their own capacities, sellers of their labor-power, and sensu- evidence, for esteem is
ous participants with exchange relations.”?” By law blacks were prevented in ways to demonstrate thi
many instances from acting as entrepreneurs of their own inventiveness and taught to whites, becarr
brokers of their own labor. As business expanded in virtually every corner of Walker emerged as the r
the marketplace, blacks were largely relegated to sideline observers. Outside catchphrase of the era—
of their own communities African Americans could work only in prescribed artifacts being collectec
professions, usually menial and servile vocations. With little or no involve- (Cubism is the well-knov
ment in the means of production, and few opportunities for imaginative acquisition fell in line «
self-employment in business, blacks were locked into “their place.” Frustra- susiatizs, Like Cubier,
tions began to mount not merely because of restrictions, but also because imbrication, which elev:
American business was growing at a fever pitch. The timing of the Supreme they could learn the “ps
Court ruling on segregation could not have been worse, for it not only cre- displayed their conspicy
ated second-class citizenship, it effectively cut off blacks from the era's ex- desirable (albeit at a sa
hilarating possibilities. Poverty is devastating, but poverty amid seemingly walkers—as Will Mario:
boundless wealth is cruelly ironic in a so-called free-market society. Cakewalk, attested —the
Competitiveness required selling. If blacks were to be denied the right to blackness through cake
sell commodities, they were left to sell themselves. It was a déja vu of slavery, learn it from someone *
but this time the item was marked and polished by its “realness.” But merely Overton Walker was the
selling the “real coon” would not be sufficient to overcome white hegemony the blue bloods, Walker
in the theater. The “realness” had to be transferable; in other words, whites Buffalo Bill show did fo:
not only had to observe “real” blackness, they had to experience it as well. ing a wish to experience
“Blackness” had to be made marketable, a species not only in the showcase we will shortly observe.
window (or on the auction block), but something a buyer might sensuously origins and hardly the r
108 DAVID KRASNER
ff "
i? ‘ .
er
ay
eal

--- Page 11 ---
=v

“adorn.” The product had to be felt, bejeweled, and experienced; it had to
be tactile as well as visual. The mode of exchange was performance; what
would be marketed would be teaching whites how to “be black.” Blacks sold
authenticity using rhetoric, gesture, and conviction —blackness in the body
itself and not just the mere surface greasepaint of blackface. Reality had to
be invented, but it also had to conform to real body language, movement,
and performance. Whites would have to purchase blackness from those best
equipped to sell it—“real” black performers.

Black performers, Aida Overton Walker in particular, capitalized on
what Thorstein Veblen famously called “conspicuous consumption.” In his
well-known 1899 book, The Theory of the Leisure Class, Veblen illuminated
the sort of portal through which black performers might enter as success-
ful “investors.” According to Veblen, the turn of the century created a need
for people not merely to acquire wealth but to display it ostentatiously. “In
order to gain and to hold the esteem of men,” he said, “it is not sufficient
merely to possess wealth or power. The wealth or power must be put in
evidence, for esteem is awarded only on evidence.”2® The wealthy sought
ways to demonstrate their social status; the cakewalk, a dance that Walker
taught to whites, became a signifier of Veblen’s conspicuous consumption.
Walker emerged as the principal cakewalking teacher. Acting “primitive’—a
catchphrase of the era—by way of cakewalking became one of the cultural
artifacts being collected by the West. Co-opting the vogue of primitivism
(Cubism is the well-known example), the movement toward collectibles and
acquisition fell in line with the “realness” whites associated with primitive
societies. Like Cubism, cakewalking was therefore marked by its primitive
imbrication, which elevated its cachet. If whites could learn the cakewalk,

they could learn the “performance of blackness,” the bodily gestures that
displayed their conspicuous consumption. If real blackness was something
desirable (albeit at a safe distance), and if blacks were the original cake-
walkers—as Will Marion Cook’s 1898 musical, Clorindy, the Origins of the
Cakewalk, attested—then whites could demonstrate their ability to display
blackness through cakewalking. But to be successful at this, whites had to
learn it from someone “authentic.” Taking cakewalking lessons from Aida
Overton Walker was therefore de rigueur for the upstart wealthy as well as
the blue bloods. Walker did for the cakewalk dance what William Cody’s
Buffalo Bill show did for the Wild West— capitalizing on and literally sell-
ing a wish to experience something “essential” about a certain culture. As
we will shortly observe, cakewalking was a conglomerate dance of mixed
origins and hardly the result of a singular or linear development. But this
The Real Thing 109
ir
7
, mi
rn a = age

--- Page 12 ---
mattered little in the rhetorical strategy of selling the cakewalk; what mat- a ae
tered to its promoters were consumers eager to demonstrate their status = . a ,
and sellers deftly marketing the product. ¥ a c ‘ ‘
Cakewalking to the Real Thing , a a :
The most popular cakewalk dancer in the United States during the turn of . =! ~ =
the century, Aida Overton Walker (1880-1914) was described by Sterling ¥ TR.
Brown as “the most talented Negro soubrette and dancer of her time.”*° Five p +
years after her death, Howe Alexander eulogized her work as “the apogee of _&
dancing done by Colored dancers.” Her dance, he said, “had the power to di- y HT
late the vision and stretch the imagination.”*° In 1914 Variety reported that j \
she was “easily the foremost Afro-American stage artist”; and sixteen years ‘
after her death James Weldon Johnson crowned her “beyond comparison 4 | ;
the brightest star among women in the Negro stage of the period; and it is a :
a question whether or not she has since been surpassed.”*? According to her er . a
biographer, Richard Newman, Walker's “life changed” when in 1898 Stella a
Wiley, a performer and occasional dance partner to Bob Cole, “invited her 4
to pose dancing the cakewalk for an American Tobacco Company trade-card | |
photograph.”*? Walker joined George Walker (whom she would marry in rd  -
1899), Bert Williams, and Wiley, becoming the company’s leading choreog- ; pat - ye { | ;
rapher and actress. When Williams and Walker performed In Dahomey in a} go
London in 1903, Constance Beerbohm reported in the London Tatler that in re - ' ,
“In Dahomey at the Shaftesbury Theatre we are nightly seeing real negroes ade |
dancing real calk-walk and noting the grace and true inwardness of the
dance.”*2 Beerbohm’s emphasis on “real Negroes” and “real calk-walk” was ™ at
part of a cultural interest in the real that spotlighted the popular American ae
dance. However, the notion of “realness” was also part of a designed strategy Fivurngs, Georgaanl ike om
that worked on behalf of the performers. A brief history of the cakewalk Bandanna Land. Schomb.-2 2
confirms how Walker in many ways marketed its “realness.”
Walker was not the first African American to popularize the cakewalk dance having African roz+s. _
among whites. Dora Dean danced it during the 1890s in Europe, and the walk dancing loomed lazz: = -
composer Will Marion Cook’s Broadway musical Clorindy, the Origins of both the cakewalk and === _
the Cakewalk certainly contributed to the dance’s popularity. What Walker merely two decades, anc ==: a
did was advance the cakewalk as a kind of “myth.” She branded her insig- decades. The cakewalk’s ----
nia on cakewalking: over time her appropriation of the dance became more the 1890s to its decline a>: _-
elaborate and ambitious, and her emphasis on grace and ease was her sig- “cakewalk” as somethin=z --:: =
nature on the dance itself. Its commodity value was the “authenticity” she ficult to confirm, the pee : wea
lent to the cakewalk—hers was the “true” knowledge of a genuine black to Aida Overton Walke-.
110 DAVID KRASNER “y
g ~_
a a
iy wl
— a
a ve

--- Page 13 ---
—_, |i
ll ‘ / S. ‘ . _ = be se
i. ea
i ae
ome Eo. eZ
. pa
‘4 a ij .
: : j a ig _¥
oe , 4 fi hee :
ie a oaks -
Figure 4.1. George and Aida Overton Walker performing a dance in their production of
Bandanna Land. Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, SC-CN-82-0029.
dance having African roots. Like Buffalo Bill’s “cowboy,” the image of cake-
walk dancing loomed large in popular imagination, even if the actual era of
i both the cakewalk and the cowboy was fleeting. The “real” cowboy endured
| merely two decades, and the popularity of the cakewalk lasted at most two
A decades. The cakewalk’s influence coincided with interest in ragtime from
: the 1890s to its decline around 1910. What remained was the association of
' “cakewalk” as something that can be accomplished with ease. Although dif-
: ficult to confirm, the popular expression “it’s a cakewalk” is likely credited
‘ to Aida Overton Walker.
The Real Thing 111
t
h

--- Page 14 ---
The news of Walker’s cakewalking success in the 1903 London produc- the appearance of a man an

tion of In Dahomey led to a desire by New York elite to absorb it from “the you see how necessary it is.
real thing.” An interview of Walker titled “Cakewalk Society” reported that as they can, but also to conve
the “New York 400”—an elite social group—has “fallen under [the] spell of delighted with the chance c:
the willowy dance” and that Walker “leads young women in the mazy steps.” forget the eyes. ... In fact. 2
The article went on to say that Walker, “a well-known colored actress, has a prime requisite.*®
taken the ‘400’ by storm by her graceful dancing and under her graceful
leadership society has taken up the cakewalk until it is the perfect rage.”*4 In evidence here is the ex;
The emphasis here and elsewhere was on Walker’s trademark “grace.” She its history as a symbol of grac:
had conducted several interviews on the subject of cakewalking in which beneath the crowd-pleasing <:
she portrayed the dance as intertwined with race, authenticity, and social sangfroid, and the mask cove=
acceptability. The operative word she stressed was grace. When asked why do: white star actors knew the
African Americans are adept at cakewalking, she replied: “The negroes are Walker and her cohorts had =:
not pessimists; there is no expression of sadness in their countenances, even ideas of elegance and self-pr:=
in repose. . . . Think of moonlight nights and pine knots and tallow dips of creative impulse went a lor: >
lives untouched by the hardness of toil, for I tell you there was sunshine in capitalizing on perceived “tra=
the hearts of those who first danced the cakewalk.” Her response was de- always evolving. The evolvizs -
signed to draw a compelling picture of lightness and joy, but it was also calls “black diaspora styles.” ~
meant to create a backdrop of authenticity. Relating the history of cake- their radically unfinished *¢==
walking, she describes its ease and charm: “In the old times there was more ibly as the products of slavex.”
of what the original cakewalker called ‘dignity. It was more of a walk, less “in fashion” by stressing its s_z
of a dance. The African race is a graceful people. It thrums banjoes with a happy, for the original cakew 2
flourish, and even when it has to do with pickaxes it gives those implements their work was done.” But s=: :
a long and graceful swing. That grace is inborn.” Emphasizing this “grace” the actual steps of the dan:z.“
as innate, she asserted her authenticity and improved her marketability. She sizing the cakewalk’s dulce: 2-=
added that “society, which is now learning the cakewalk, has had the advan-

a . . As far as the actual exe: 2:
tage of years of training by the best masters of dancing and of the bodily may mundaastheitinstrabsr
graces.” Placing herself front and center as the cakewalker, she went on to ber to show by th oe
define the dance: y tne SNE —_—

and happy, I do not be2== -
The cakewalk is a dance peculiar to our people. Its steps, however, are ne ieee 7 =
, oa in order to understané ‘+ 2.
of American origin, whatever the original idea may have been. The itienenessaryte keossos 9
tempo is often that of the two-step and the march. ... But that is only cially upon what the covery
the mathematics of it.. .. Remember that the cakewalk in itself is an ~
expression of joy, of freedom from toil, of solitary making. There, too, By commodifying the ¢>_-
bear in mind that there are other purposes. It is necessary to impress tic of a race”), Walker, as 2 =:-=
the judges with the gracefulness of the cakewalker in order to win the choreographic ideas ané *.=-
prize. ... Because each dancer desires to attract to himself or herself thenticity.’48 The origins 77 —
the most graceful partner, for the judges make up their decisions upon suggests that the cakewa_s :-
112 DAVID KRASNER re

--- Page 15 ---
ae
_
: the appearance of a man and woman cakewalking together. ... Don’t
You see how necessary it is for the dancers to be not only as graceful
: as they can, but also to convey an idea by their expression that they are
delighted with the chance of dancing together. Therefore, I say, don’t
. forget the eyes... . In fact, a little flirtation—just a little flirtation—is
a prime requisite.*®
In evidence here is the explanation of the cakewalk’s origination and
its history as a symbol of grace and sexual charm. Walker’s cool aloofness
. beneath the crowd-pleasing charm, the caginess behind the exaggerated
sangfroid, and the mask covering the self-promotion was what she had to
do: white star actors knew the mainstream press would fan their legends;
j Walker and her cohorts had to stump for themselves. But more than these
ideas of elegance and self-promotion, Walker’s notion of improvisation and
creative impulse went a long way in establishing an aesthetic even while
capitalizing on perceived “traditions.” The dance, as Walker explained it, was
always evolving. The evolving idea was part of a strategy that Paul Gilroy
: calls “black diaspora styles,” the process of performance “emphasized by
‘ their radically unfinished form—a characteristic which marks them indel-
j ibly as the products of slavery.’* Walker kept the description of the dance
: “in fashion” by stressing its slave tradition and evolutionary contours: “Be
happy, for the original cakewalkers were glad at the light of the moon when
: their work was done.” But she also folded in a nuanced style. In describing
the actual steps of the dance, Walker stressed flirtation and charm, empha-
t sizing the cakewalk’s dulcet attributes:
; As far as the actual execution of the steps is concerned many persons
i may surpass their instructors in time. If, however, they do not remem-
t ber to show by the expression of their faces that they are interested
and happy, I do not believe that any amount of fancy steps will make
up for such a defect. .. . The cakewalk is characteristic of a race, and
4 in order to understand it and appreciate it and to become adept in it,
it is necessary to keep your mind on the judges, your partner and espe-
| cially upon what the cakewalk really is—a gala dance.4”
| By commodifying the cultural authenticity of the cakewalk (“characteris-
’ tic of a race”), Walker, as I have noted elsewhere, “cloaked the origins of her
i choreographic ideas and signified on the basic ideas of a semantics of au-
thenticity.”** The origins of the cakewalk are inchoate at best; Terry Waldo
| suggests that the cakewalk originated “with slaves who dressed up in ‘high
The Real Thing 113

--- Page 16 ---
—
fashion’ and mimicked the formal dances of their masters. Their carica-
tures were picked up by white performers and used in the grand finale of
the minstrel show.’ African Americans “performing in the black-stereotype — =
mold of the white minstrel shows picked up the dance. By the time the rag- _ -
time era began in 1896, the cakewalk was being performed by blacks imi- =
tating whites who were imitating blacks who were imitating whites.”*° The w=
comedic hall of mirrors that is the cakewalk appears to undermine Walker’s i a .
view that the dance expresses a “characteristic of a race.” However, Walker’s “a a
description of cakewalking is best conceived of as a bricolage of influences _ y aS -
and modifications, an understanding that signifies the dance as a subcul- a whe ¥ a
tural invention. According to Dick Hebdige, such bricolage “is basically the A LS “,
way in which commodities are used in subculture which mark the subcul- S —_ nae # ry
ture off from more orthodox cultural formations.”®° Walker exploited many we ii iG ne
clichés, in particular those associated with the “origins of the cakewalk” as ; y / 7 oy +
an essentialized construction. But she did so out of necessity. She capital- y F A Xu *
ized on the aggressive “go-for-it” rhetoric of her time, selling what she had ea rt ” a
at her disposal. Furthermore, white Americans frequently depicted African my i my / _: Y
Americans as bound to their “original” state, as people fixed and without ; y J a + i
history. The cakewalk, like African American culture more generally, was oi (ie ot: X. vee
perceived as frozen in time. Its gestures and movements were alleged to a [" i ee iz
be a source of authenticity from its inception. Thus, for Walker, the cake- aad a Ts -
walk represented a link to a “primitive” past. According to Brooke Bald- t PN rae v 7 y
win, “the cakewalk can be identified as an Afro-American folk form with 4 * a Res a?
roots in African music through its traits of syncopation and suspended beat, —a
polyrhythmic structure, signifying, improvisation, and responsoriality. All
combine to make it a genuinely black cultural product, which is exactly grandly with a high kics=
why whites, from the beginning, attempted to co-opt and stereotype it, Vaudeville performer T: =
Baldwin’s description is correct up to a point. It does not take into account cakewalk was original” :
that the cakewalk itself was of dubious origins. Its hybrid form had in fact or “walk-around,” deve. ::
many influences. According to Roscoe Lewis in The Negro in Virginia, the generally at get-togethers
cakewalk “has been ascribed to African tribal celebrations.”** There can be by white minstrel perfc-=
little doubt that it evolved from African dance traditions, especially the “ring minstrel whites, who ‘=
shout”; however, as it was absorbed in the American vernacular, it became mimicking their white m:
4 common festive dance in which slaves imitated their masters. “The slaves Walker finessed the daz:
would assemble en masse— dressed in their Sunday best. . . . Masters and catered to the demands -
mistresses would be there, one of whom would award the prize for the best its distribution.
‘outtin’ of the figgers.’ Sometimes the mistress of the big house would donate Despite success, blac:
a prize cake.” (It is likely that this last detail that gave rise to the dance’s spread popularity of <>:
name.) Marshall Sterns contends that during slavery, couples “promenaded elicited public debate. $=:
114. DAVID KRASNER
be pe HE

--- Page 17 ---
— =a
Phen i osteo 8B IS Ae
| 2G Eighth, Avence Hast
i Gide ae
‘ aa : fi ree Ae 3 Not Se
hes a LF VTS i
a ‘| oo” ee A
eee et . F é x fo 4S Pols ELEY a
aa aa . aa f eae ST 7” OW pea ?
ae ae ! | Ee NS a
— 7 al ae Fr 2 | voll » 4
SN fF. ip | or I
=  ~ '-" er rife Le Frag, be ee
oo ~ ee OO RS “i
ie, BF fe CON Wy ,
ge ™ ae . a es }
a > ESoty 4 z i ¢ 3 ? 3
rc EY F. OSGins aoa Walker, the Cubred eo ie lat-eguced THE. Ds :
7 ‘ anna Land’" Aga Cverten Wa te Dozs It, and the fritics Say
Phyl. ae age hin fog 2 the Ss'anes Test Wear Rewer Uotbes, 2
Byes Pra ree cine = cheatin beaks Sines File. 27
‘ayia eS
{ if a ss ee y, \ (LEFT) Figure 4.2. Portrait of Aida Overton
ae ? Ne &, avn Walker, ca. 1911. Schomburg Center for
oe? te hae oo ae ne caf 4: Research in Black Culture, SC-CN-85-0158.
a Lie ei: ' pats ”
ee rele , : (ABoveE) Figure 4.3. Aida Overton Walker
a a " AR.
7 Pe ~~ hl i yf as Salome, drawing by Moe Zayas. From New
kd PAA % “g Aah a Se, . York World, August 30, 1908, Metropolitan
eM nd Po abt f Section, p. 2.
grandly with a high kickstep, waving canes, doffing hats, and bowing low.”
} Vaudeville performer Tom Fletcher makes the interesting claim that the
¥ cakewalk was originally a processional dance called “the chalkline-walk”
or “walk-around,” developed “from a ‘Prize-Walk’ from the days of slavery,
generally at get-togethers on the plantation.”®* But once it was picked up
by white minstrel performers, its steps were modified. When blacks copied
; minstrel whites, who imitated plantation blacks, who were sarcastically
| mimicking their white masters, details of the dance’s origins go up for grabs.
Walker finessed the dance’s meaning and maximized its market value. She
catered to the demands of her white students but asserted her control over
its distribution.
Despite success, black performers faced another problem. The wide-
spread popularity of the cakewalk and the intense condemnation of it
i elicited public debate. Some “New Negro” progressives campaigned against
: The Real Thing 115
at —_€ 8

--- Page 18 ---
SS
it, believing that it promoted open sexuality and folderol (Washington's exp ast 2 i, oie teer , St
frowned-upon “gewgaw”) and recalled memories of a painful past. One 1897 schayt eh saciewe ow = its
editorial from the Indianapolis Freeman maintained that the “good people orientation, Gioamion gas sect
of this country have nothing in common with cake walks,” because “the great Walker, as I have sugzesce:
crime attached to cake walks is the resurrection of supposed obsolete man- picious of cakewalking. —
ners... and if there is anything that gets close to the modern Negro, it is able to that part of white $72.
the reminder of past associations and tribulations.” The fear of losing con- aries. If black society hac :2s7
trol owing to the dance’s seductive powers prompted the Cleveland Gazette attempted to allay its fears =:
to report disapprovingly that “some of our best girls, even some who sing stereotyping; and as white <=
in the Baptist church choir, I regret exceedingly to say, were roped in and Walker emerged as cakew 222
took part in the disgraceful affair.”°° In an article entitled “Rag-Time Music ety and salesmanship. she i<<:
and Calk Walks.” the front page of the Chicago Broad Ax called the “two on the stage have been giver »
above named past-times disgusting — ridiculously disgusting!” Why, the and critics; perhaps they 22.
paper inquired, should “mothers of refinement and proper training allow or perhaps it has just Dex :
their young, pliable, easily impressed daughters to indulge in any such dev- Booker T. Washington's ex: =
ilment and monkey shines is a mystery to the writer, who would far prefer that the stage was a via>.¢ 2.
washing her daughter's face and following her to the cemetery to see her rearguard action in African +
going to hell” as the result of “dancing cake-walks, indulging in rag-time her work: “In the past =f 7:
music, and other such deviltry.”°* In The Negro in Etiquette, E. M. Woods merited severe criticism. ~ 2: _
was even more critical: “The cake walk is really a negro product. Never- has improved with time. in:
theless, its more prominent features are ‘monkey shines,’ coarse, clownish honest and well deservinz ==
jokes, and many ludicrous didos akin to the funny mule in the circus.” He sional life who will comy 2r¢ ?:
added sarcastically; “The more zealous votaries of the cake-waking fad, hold in the profession or othe: 2>:7
that it teaches naturalness and gracefulness. This is not denied; nor is it refuse to classify, in deznz +
altogether affirmed. For one may be a natural fool or an artificial fool.’°” should not all be judgec ay ‘,
One of the strongest condemnations came in an 1898 Freeman editorial: tinctions when judging : =>:
“As representative of the colored race I desire to enter my protest against regard the Stage asa plac: 7: :
the ‘cake walk’ which is now becoming a fad among some colored people, to meet such persons. I s=7:
encouraged by whites. . .. The whites go to these exhibitions of buffoonery as to what is really being 2:2:
to laugh at and ridicule the monkified contortions of the principal actors.” on the Stage.” Walker ac i=:
The editorial concludes: “I insist that the cake walk is beneath the dignity
of the better class of ‘the race, and that it brings them into ridicule and In this age we are all 227
contempt ... and so should be frowned down by the better class of colored lem! I venture to thins ==:
people.”** The acidulous critique resulted from the belief that it possessed toward the alleviatic: :: -
sexual overtones and gimcracks that contradicted appropriate moral stan- among colored peop:
dards. But criticism in a broader sense can be viewed as part of the backlash show that we are as ¢2721
against modernity traceable to the early 1900s. This period experienced a re- when colored people =: = :
action to progress, defended creationism over encroaching Darwinism, and those before the ligh=: = _s
favored what Ferdinand Ténnies called Gemeinschaft (community), with its are capable and with 222
116 DAVID KRASNER >

--- Page 19 ---
—_ ee
emphasis on trust, kinship, social bonding, and pastoral values, over Gesell-
schaft (civil society), with its emphasis on business, competition, market
orientation, urbanity, and ruthlessness.®°
Walker, as I have suggested, “hoped to mollify middle-class blacks sus-
picious of cakewalking, and, simultaneously, to make cakewalking accept-
able to that part of white society interested in transgressing racial bound-
aries. If black society had cast a shadow of doubt over cakewalking, Walker
attempted to allay its fears that cakewalking was representative of racial
stereotyping; and as white elite society wanted to learn about black dance,
Walker emerged as cakewalking’s popular practitioner.’®° Balancing propri-
ety and salesmanship, she defended herself and her career: “Colored people
on the stage have been given very little consideration by our colored writers
and critics; perhaps they have considered them unworthy of the attention,
or perhaps it has just been a matter of oversight.” She added—keeping
Booker T. Washington’s emphasis on discipline and work ethic in mind—
that the stage was a viable avenue for black women and “decent” labor. Her
rearguard action in African American newspapers was an effort to justify
her work: “In the past the profession which I am now following may have
merited severe criticism, but like every other calling or profession, the Stage
i has improved with time, and I am proud to say that there are many clever,
honest and well deserving men and women of other races in color in profes-
\ sional life who will compare favorably with men and woman of other races
in the profession or other professions.” She argued that “when white people
| refuse to classify, in dealing with us, we get highly indignant and say we
should not all be judged alike, and yet we often fail to classify and make dis-

tinctions when judging ourselves. . .. Some of our so-called society people
: regard the Stage as a place to be ashamed of. Whenever it is my good fortune
to meet such persons, I sympathize with them for I know they are ignorant
| as to what is really being done in their own behalf by members of their race

on the Stage.” Walker added:

In this age we are all fighting the one problem—that is the color prob-

lem! I venture to think and dare to state that our profession does more
toward the alleviation of color prejudice than any other profession
among colored people. .. . As individuals we must strive all we can to
show that we are as capable as white people. In all other walks of life
when colored people have had fair play, they have proved their ability,
those before the lights must do their part for the cause. .. .Our people

are capable and with advantages they will succeed.**

The Real Thing 117

--- Page 20 ---
a oa
But black people, as Walker knew well, did not enjoy “fair play.” Con- thentic Versace, Prada, cz ==
sequently, the cakewalk had to be transformed to suit her agenda. If the consumerism and iting: - cs
“real” cakewalk could be turned into the mythical embodiment of “primi- sincerely, against the grai- a
tive Africa,” then Walker would have to give the British and Americans of the global to challenge —
what they wanted: a dance with “genuine” African roots. Walker stepped quite central to the peop’: ot
into the center of the cakewalk craze as the “authentic” dancer with legiti- access to a global mainstrsi=.
mate credentials. The fact that the cakewalk was a hybrid did not deter her cause it characterized an ===
from promoting the “real thing.” The fault line between truth and invention marginalized “authenticit.” _
was artfully joined by Walker in her approach to the cakewalk dance. She conspicuous consumerist: a
had created a process by which, in anthropologist Michael Taussig’s words, commodities of today, an Zee
the real is “really made up.” Walker maneuvered the tight space between living with it. Cakewalkir.z ~ x
accusations of degrading stereotype and promoting a cultural touchstone. exchanged; it existed pars =
Her footing was surest when she articulated the importance of women as Walker’s imagination, bu < TY
professionals. Examining market strategies of Walker’s dancing the “origi- market—when it was actriz).
nal” cakewalk reveals a complex and ingenious use of the real to circum- currency. When whites dc —_
vent racist obstacles and establish her company’s success. Julia Kristeva lowed Walker’s instructic-< 7
contends that the “true-real” of modernity “relativizes the notion of truth, #Gdflen was ot: Lene] om 2 we
and, while maintaining it, often presents it to us in an extremely attractive orchestrated by Walker. It vz: |
way.’®? Walker, too, relativized an authenticity that, as the above endeavors is authenticated. Fashion ‘s --x
to show, fit several demands. empirical actions and mate==,
The popularity of cakewalking during its heyday epitomizes much of sight that she had the whez=--~
what black popular culture has utilized in selling the real now. At the be- text in ways that we take fo- sae
ginning of the twentieth century, writes Karen Sotiropoulos, “black popular actress allowed her 40 acc _- .
artists sold white Americans on the idea that black style was the very essence ishingly, when she did it.
of cool.”&+ If dancing the cakewalk was “cool,” Walker’s method was to sell
the “real cool,” anticipating what has come to be called “ghetto fabulous.”
According to John L. Jackson,
To be ghetto fabulous is to embrace a sense of self utterly irreducible 1. George Walker, “The Rez. 2 »
to one’s assumed location at the residential and spatial bottom of na- 2. Their early shows were S:~: 2
tional or international pecking order. Ghetto fabulousness takes the A Lucky Coon (1899), 4-11-44. =* +.
quantified assumptions of localizing marginality and transforms them vonrattin 2790) _ aa "
into a qualitatively different kind of lived experience, a way of travers- Bene . i Pat file» a
ing the socio-spatial margin that privileges personal and intimate People, 1816-1960 CMeamans, Cer
privatizations over market-based instrumentality of social scientists, 3. George Walker, “Bert anc 3: :
government agencies, and economic modeling. 4. See Thomas Riis, Just Be-: >. .
Ghetto fabulous, Jackson adds, “is not simply a depressing enslavement to lle hele =
designer clothes—foolish ghetto residents living beyond their means in au- versity Press, 1989); Errol Hill —
118 DAVID KRASNER —

--- Page 21 ---
iii tie a
thentic Versace, Prada, or even Burberry fashion.” Rather, it “epitomizes a
consumerism and commercialism that revels in knock- offs and wears them,
sincerely, against the grain of societal expectations,” yielding “the underside
of the global to challenge its own confinement, to declare the social margins

: quite central to the people who live there, even as they struggle for more
access to a global mainstream.”®* The cakewalk was “ghetto fabulous” be-
cause it characterized an underground localized economy and promoted a
marginalized “authenticity.” It came from the “spatial bottom,’ represented
conspicuous consumerism much like knock-off clothes are “slhumming-it”
commodities of today, and declared its marginal status as central to those
living with it. Cakewalking was, furthermore, “real” at the moment it was
exchanged; it existed partly in what had occurred before, and partly in
Walker’s imagination, but it was concretized when it was sold on the open
market—when it was actually danced—while Walker’s authenticity lent it
: currency. When whites donned the countenance of cakewalking and fol-
: lowed Walker’s instructions, they were ipso facto “real” cakewalkers. Its
realism was not based on a reified past but an active and evolving present
: orchestrated by Walker. It was the “real thing” in the same way as fashion
i is authenticated. Fashion is itself a shill game, but is nonetheless real in its
i empirical actions and material existence. It is a testament to Walker’s in-
sight that she had the wherewithal to envision the cakewalk in a social con-
i text in ways that we take for granted now. Walker’s ken as entrepreneur and
actress allowed her to accomplish what she did, and perhaps more aston-
| ishingly, when she did it.
NOTES
| 1. George Walker, “The Real Coons,” Theatre Magazine 6 (1906), 224.
: 2. Their early shows were Senegambian Carnival (1898), Two Real Coons (1898),
A Lucky Coon (1899), 4-11-44 (1899), The Policy Players (1899-1900) and Sons of
‘ Ham (1900~1902). For statistical records of the shows, see Edward Mapp, Direc-
tory of Blacks in the Performing Arts (Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1978); and
Bernard L. Peterson, Profiles of African American Stage Performers and Theatre
| People, 1816-1960 (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 2001).
| 3. George Walker, “Bert and Me and Them,” New York Age, December 24, 1908, 4.
4. See Thomas Riis, Just Before Jazz: Black Musical Theatre in New York, 1890-
4 1915 (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1989); Allen Woll, Black
j Musical Theatre: From Coontown to Dreamgirls (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State Uni-
a versity Press, 1989); Errol Hill, “New Vistas: Plays, Spectacles, Musicals, and Opera,”
| The Real Thing 119

--- Page 22 ---
in A History of African American Theatre, ed, Errol Hill and James V. Hatch (Cam- 19. R. C. Murray, “William:
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 135-853 and Jeffrey Green, “In Dahomey zine, September 1905, 496.
in London in 1903,” Black Perspective in Music 11, no. 1 (Spring 1983): 22-40. 20. Baltimore Afro-Americe
s.'f. J. Jackson Lears, No Place of Grace: Antimodernism and the Transformation 21. Louis Chude-Sokei, The
of American Culture, 1880-1920 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983), 5: nity, and the African Diaspora
6. Eric Lott, Love and Theft: Blackface Minstrelsy and the American Working 22. Harry J. Elam Jr, “Char
Class (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993), 110. Black Cultural Traffic: Crossre
7. Miles Orvell, The Real Thing: Imitation and Authenticity in American Culture, Harry J. Elam Jr. and Kennel!
1880-1940 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 19 89), Xvi, 34. 2005), 379.
8. Toni Morrison, “Unspeakable Things Unspoken: The Afro-American Presence 23. Ellis Cashmore, The B
in American Literature,” Michigan Quarterly Review 28, no. 1 (198g): 11. 28, 29.
g. One fine exception is Kenneth W. Warren, Black and White Strangers: Race 24. Krasner, Resistance, Pa:
and American Literary Realism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993). 25. Franz Fanon, Black Ski:
10. Amy Kaplan, The Social Construction of American Realism (Chicago: Univer- York: Grove, 1967), 109; Berna:
sity of Chicago Press, 1988), 1. (Amherst: University of Masse
11, See David Krasner, Resistance, Parody, and Double Consciousness in African 26. See a report on the W
American Theatre, 1895-1910 (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1997); and Karen Soti- sored by Williams and Walke:
ropoulos, Staging Race: Black Performers in Turn of the Century America (Cam- performed before Washingtor,
bridge: Harvard University Press, 2006) for a history of their resistance to racism. Walker” New York Age, Augus:
12, See Louis S$. Warren, Buffalo Bill’s America: William Cody and the Wild West 27. Booker T. Washingtc:
Show (New York: Knopf, 2005); Larry McMurtry, The Colonel and Kittle Missie: Buf- American Soctal and Politica:
falo Bill, Annie Oakley, and the Beginning of Superstardom in America (New York: wick, N.J.: Transaction Press. -
Simon & Schuster, 2005); and Robert W. Rydell and Rob Kroes, Buffalo Bill in Bolo- 28. Sven Beckert, “From T:
gna: The Americanization of the World, 1869-1922 (Chicago: University of Chicago pire of Cotton,’ Journal of Am:
Press, 2005). 2g. See Leach, Land of D:
13. See Barbara Webb, “Authentic Possibilities: Plantation Performance of the Markets, and Class at the Tur
18908,” Theatre Journal 56, no. 1 (March 2004): 63-82. Cheap Amusements: Working}
14. Thomas Postlewait, “The Hieroglyphic Stage: American Theatre and Society, (Philadelphia: Temple Unive
Post-Civil War to 1945,’ in vol. 2 of The Cambridge History of American Theatre, Lears, eds., The Culture of Cons
1870-1945, ed. Don B. Wilmeth and Christopher Bigsby (Cambridge: Cambridge 1980 (New York: Pantheon, 12
University Press, 1999), 161. Mass Images and the Shaping
15. Robert Ogden, “Advertising Art” May 15, 1898; quoted in William Leach, of Minnesota Press, 1992); Re’
Land of Desire: Merchants, Power, and the Rise of a New American Culture (New at American International Ex:
York: Vintage, 1993), 52. Press, 1987); and Alan Trach:
16. “Williams and Walker Coming,” Colored American (Washington, D.C.), May 6, Society in the Gilded Age (New
1899, 2. 30. Martin J. Sklar, The C%
17. George Walker, “Colored Actor Tells the Story of His Life from Kansas to Abys- History in the Progressive Er:
sinia”’ undated clipping circa 1906 (the date of the Abyssinia’s production), from Press, 1992), 21.
the Williams & Walker clipping file, Billy Rose Theatre Collection, New York Public 31. Benjamin M. Friedmar.
. Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center, New York, N.Y. (hereafter Billy York: Knopf, 2005), 132.
Rose Theatre Collection). 32. James E. Block, A Natiz
18. Walker, “The Negro on the American Stage,’ 566. Society (Cambridge: Harvard
120 DAVID KRASNER

--- Page 23 ---
ina ee
ig. R. C. Murray, “Williams and Walker, Comedians,” Colored American Maga-
zine, September 1905, 496.
20. Baltimore Afro-American, August 16, 1930, 9.
21. Louis Chude-Sokei, The Last Darky: Bert Williams, Black-on-Black Moder-
nity, and the African Diaspora (Durham: Duke University Press, 2006), 124.
22. Harry J. Elam Jr., “Change Clothes and Go: A Postscript to Postblackness,” in
Black Cultural Traffic: Crossroads in Global Performance and Popular Culture, ed.
Harry J. Elam Jr. and Kennell Jackson (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press,
2005), 379.
23. Ellis Cashmore, The Black Cultural Industry (London: Routledge, 1997),
28, 29.
24. Krasner, Resistance, Parody, and Double Consciousness, 9.
25. Franz Fanon, Black Skin, White Masks, trans. Charles Lam Markmann (New
4 York: Grove, 1967), 109; Bernard W. Bell, The Afro-American Novel and Its Tradition
(Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1987), xi.
26. See a report on the Williams & Walker Glee Club, a musical group spon-
: sored by Williams and Walker for the promotion of classical music. The glee club
performed before Washington at his Tuskegee Institute. “Washington, Williams and
Walker,” New York Age, August 3, 1905, 4.
27. Booker T. Washington, “Atlanta Exposition Address,” 1895, in African-
4 American Social and Political Thought, 1850-1920, ed. Howard Brotz (New Bruns-
i wick, N.J.: Transaction Press, 1993), 357.
| 28. Sven Beckert, “From Tuskegee to Togo: The Problem of Freedom in the Em-
4 pire of Cotton,’ Journal of American History 92, no. 2 (September 2005): 508.
29. See Leach, Land of Desire; Richard Ohmann, Selling Culture: Magazines,
Markets, and Class at the Turn of the Century (London: Verso, 1996); Kathy Peiss,
5 Cheap Amusements: Working Women and Leisure in Turn-of-the-Century New York
| (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1986); Richard W. Fox and T. J. Jackson
Lears, eds., The Culture of Consumption: Critical Essays in American History, 1880-
1980 (New York: Pantheon, 1983); Elizabeth and Stuart Ewen, Channels of Desire:
Mass Images and the Shaping of American Consciousness (Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 1992); Robert Rydell, All the World’s A Fair: Visions of Empire
q at American International Expositions, 1876-1916 (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1987); and Alan Trachtenberg, The Incorporation of America: Culture and
Society in the Gilded Age (New York: Hill and Wang, 1982).
30. Martin J. Sklar, The United States as a Developing Country: Studies in U. S.
History in the Progressive Era and the 1920s (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1992), 21.
31. Benjamin M. Friedman, The Moral Consequences of Economic Growth (New
York: Knopf, 2005), 132.
32. James E. Block, A Nation of Agents: The American Path to a Modern Self and
Society (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2002), 481.
The Real Thing 121
t

--- Page 24 ---
33. David A. Wells, “Influence of the Production and Distribution of Wealth on 1940), 89; quoted in Lynne Fz,
Social Development,’ Journal of Social Science 8 (May 1876): 5 (paper delivered in to 1970 (New York: Dance E::
1875). Story of American Vaudeville _-

34. William Matthews, Getting on in the World: Hints of Success in Life (Chi- 100 Years of the Negro in Show =
cago: S.C. Griggs, 1878), 125; Russell H. Conwell, Acres of Diamonds: How Men and 54. “That Cake Walk,” Inc::
Women May Become Rich (Philadelphia: John Y. Huber, 1890), 22. 55. “New Castle Pa, News.” -

35. Wilbur F. Crafts, Successful Men of Today and What They Say of Success (New 56. “Rag-time Music ane Cz
York: Funk & Wagnalls, 1883), 146. 57. E. M. Woods, The Nes: -

36. Orison Swett Marden, Pushing to the Front: Or, Success Under Difficulties 1899), 131.

(New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1894), 23, 109. 58. Indianapolis Freemc-. =

37. Nikhil Pal Singh, Black Is a Country: Race and the Unfinished Struggle for 5g. Ferdinand Ténnies. 7--
Democracy (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2004), 26. Margaret Hollis (1887; rep-~

38. Thorstein Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class (1899; reprint, New York: 6o. Krasner, Resistance. =2~
Dover, 1994), 24- 61. Aida Overton Walkez. ° 2:
39. Sterling A. Brown, “The Negro on the Stage” (1940), unpublished study, The can Magazine, October 1g: =. =
Negro in American Culture, Carnegie-Myrdal Study, Schomburg Center for Research 62. Michael Taussig, 2% —-
in Black Culture, New York, 37. (London: Routledge, 1993 . =.
40. Howe Alexander, “How Dancing Studs the Pages of History,’ Half-Century 63. Julia Kristeva, “The Tr_::
Magazine, 7, no. 2 (August 1919): 16. Tori Moi (Oxford: Blackw=". :.
41. Variety, October 17, 1914, 13; James Weldon Johnson, Black Manhattan (1930; 64. Sotiropoulos, Stag:~z :.
reprint, New York: Arno Press, 1968), 107. 6s, John L. Jackson Jn. 2:2. .
42. Richard Newman, “‘The Brightest Star’: Aida Overton Walker in the Age of versity of Chicago Press, 2: : =
Ragtime and Cakewalk,” in Words Like Freedom: Essays on African-American Cul-
ture and History (West Cornwall, Conn.: Locust Hill Press, 1996), 57-
43. Constance Beerbohm, “The ‘Cake-walk’ and Howto Dance It,’ London Tatler,
July 1, 1903, 13.
44. Undated clipping, Williams & Walker file, Billy Rose Theatre Collection.
45. Undated clipping, c. 1903, Williams & Walker file, Billy Rose Theatre Collec-
tion.
46. Paul Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness (Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press, 1993), 105.
47. Undated clipping, c. 1903, Williams & Walker file, Billy Rose Theatre Collec-
tion.
48. Krasner, Resistance, Parody, and Double Consciousness, 95-
4g. Terry Waldo, This Is Ragtime (1976; reprint, New York: Da Capo Press, 1991),
25.
50. Dick Hebdige, Subculture: The Meaning of Style (London: Routledge, 1979),
103.
51. Brooke Baldwin, “The Cakewalk: A Study in Stereotype and Reality,’ Journal
of Social History 15 (1981): 213.
52. Quoted in Sterling Stuckey, Slave Culture: Nationalist Theory & the Founda-
tions of Black America (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987), 95.
53. Virginia Writers’ Project, The Negro in Virginia (New York: Hasting House,
122 DAVID KRASNER :

--- Page 25 ---
aT
1940), 89; quoted in Lynne Fauley Emery, Black Dance in the United States from 1619
to 1970 (New York: Dance Horizons, 1980), 91; Marshall Sterns, Jazz Dance: The
Story of American Vaudeville Dance (London: Macmillan, 1964), 116; Tom Fletcher,
100 Years of the Negro in Show Business (New York: De Capo Press, 1984), 103.
54. “That Cake Walk,” Indianapolis Freeman, January 9, 1897, 4.
55. “New Castle Pa, News,” Cleveland Gazette, November 19, 1898, 2.
56. “Rag-time Music and Cake Walks,” Chicago Broad Az, January 20, 1900, 1.
57. E. M. Woods, The Negro In Etiquette: A Novelty (St. Louis: Buxton & Skinner,
1899), 131.
58. Indianapolis Freeman, February 2, 1898, 4.
59. Ferdinand Tonnies, Community and Civil Society, trans. Josh Harris and
Margaret Hollis (1887; reprint, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
4 6o. Krasner, Resistance, Parody, and Double Consciousness, 76.
61. Aida Overton Walker, “Colored Men and Women on the Stage,” Colored Amert-
i can Magazine, October 1905, 571-75.
‘ 62. Michael Taussig, Mimesis and Alterity: A Particular History of the Senses
: (London: Routledge, 1993), xiii-xix.
: 63. Julia Kristeva, “The True-Real,” trans. Sean Hand, in The Kristeva Reader, ed.
: Tori Moi (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986), 221.
: 64. Sotiropoulos, Staging Race, 237.
i 65. John L. Jackson Jr., Real Black: Adventures in Racial Sincerity (Chicago: Uni-
i versity of Chicago Press, 2005), 59-60.
Z
|
The Real Thing 123
