--- Page 1 ---
CHAPTER 11
Funk
Portia K. Maultsby

Funk is a Black thing. There is a need to express yourself as an African American.

You need to be your own person.

—Danny Webster, guitarist and vocalist for Slave!
Funk is an urban form of dance music (also known as “party” music)
that emerged in the late 1960s. It is the creation of rhythm and blues
and jazz bands, whose members sang, played instruments, wrote,
and often produced their own songs. Similar to other forms of Black
popular music, funk’s lyrics encompass themes of “party,” social
and political commentary, romance, and social relationships. Funk
borrows elements from a wide range of musical genres including
rhythm and blues-styled horn arrangements and drum patterns,
Latin percussion instrumentation, jazz-oriented solos, rock guitar
timbres and rock-oriented solos, and gospel-derived rhythms and
vocal stylings associated with soul music. This hybrid musical
aesthetic defied categorization, prompting music critics and others
to label the early funk bands as “soul groups,” “dance bands,” “black
rock,” and “jazz-funk.”’ From the late 1960s to the early 1970s, soul
music and the early funk styles overlapped as musical genres.

The emergence of funk paralleled the transition of the American
society from the era of the sanctioned racial segregation known as Jim
Crow (1890s-1960s) to the 1970s decade of “integration” and “equal
opportunity.” For many African Americans, the 1970s represented a
paradox of social unrest and ubiquitous optimism. The passage of the
1960s Great Society legislation and the establishment of affirmative

293
— co ee a 8 ees Pee a

--- Page 2 ---
il
action programs in the 1970s raised the expectations among African dance floor desc:
Americans for racial equality and economic and political empower- class as “earthy,” ”
ment. Despite the growth of a Black middle class that resulted from By the early Is
new opportunities, the social and economic conditions of the broad- a distinctive mus:
er African American community deteriorated. was to become kn¢
In the 1970s and continuing into the 1980s, many skilled labor- in the sensibilities
ers lost their high-paying jobs when the country shifted from an in- African Americar
dustrial to a technological and service-oriented society. The factories professionals as w:
that once surrounded inner-city communities and employed many comprised largely

of its residents reduced their work forces, eventually closed their protest groups.

doors and moved out of the area. At the same time, the government’s
policy of fiscal conservatism eliminated federal funded job training, THE ARCHITECTS
education, and social programs designed to improve the conditions —
of African Americans whose lives had been affected by decades of became popular ¢
“Jim Crow” laws. Power, anti-Vietr.
By the mid-1970s, society’s support for the 1960s government Movement, speaz
programs began to wane, due to changing economic conditions and Coordinating Ce
increasing claims of reverse discrimination. The spirit of hope that Christian Leaders
once prevailed in African American communities slowly changed in re- of southern Black
sponse to unfulfilled expectations. Whereas some members of the new with the disappoi:
middle class expressed ambivalence about progress, the poor and un- jected the nonvie
employed spoke of their disillusionment at the system that had failed rights leaders. As:
them. The term “funk” captured these feelings. As a musical style, ideology of Male
funk reveals the resilience and creativity of African Americans under proponents pron
changing social and economic conditions. This chapter chronicles dererretnation. ts
the emergence and development of funk; its meaning, function, and By 1968, many se
significance in Black community life; and its influence on hip-hop. Sly Stone, had be
lyrics and musica.
DEFINING FUNK Whereas the
Juba to Jive: A Dictionary of African-American Slang defines the word lw- impulse, the Civ
funki (of Central African origin), translated as “bad body odor,” as the equivalent impac:
probable origin of the term “funk.” Funk has been variously defined nity empowerme:
as “down-to-earth,” “for real,” “in touch with the essence of being It Loud, I’m Blac:
human,” or “an offensive or unpleasant smell or thing.” The term Give Me Nothing
alternately can be used to signify something “attractive or beautiful.” “Get Up, Get int
Initially interpreted as a dirty word, funk eventually became part African-oriented
of the African American vernacular, describing a feeling, attitude, further manifesta
Hard bop philosophy, and behavior, as well as a musical and cultural style. In contrast, S
aMeotthe. The term funky was first used in a musical context in the 1950s promoted by the (
1950s that as a way of describing the jazz style known as hard-bop. Associated transcended the i
incorporated with musicians such as Horace Silver, Les McCann, Jimmy Smith, In “Everyday Peor
the phrasings Lee Morgan, and Art Blakey, hard-bop is characterized by heavy social injustice ar
and harmonies drum beats and straight eighth or sixteenth notes played on the encouraged all ra
of blues, rhythm hi-hat (a shift from the ride cymbal), bass lines with dark timbres Take You Higher
and blues, and and low frequencies, gospel harmonies and melodic phrasings, and “sith the ideology
gospel music. blues timbres. This new sound often inspired movement on the 2s a African Am:
294 . African American Music =unk

za eT caine

--- Page 3 ---
222g Serean dance floor described by Black musicians and the Black working
rs) stsower class as “earthy,” “low-down,” “dirty,” or “nitty-gritty.”5
celited om By the early 1970s, the term “funky” had become analogous with
: Pees SeGads= a distinctive musical style of rhythm and blues and soul that later
was to become known as funk. An urban form of dance musicrooted ~ Funk
ized labor in the sensibilities, culrural values, and aesthetic preferences of the — Urban dance
= Y4ocn amine African American working class, this music also appealed to Black _ style, based on
Tne TEcteries professionals as well as the counterculture of the late 1960s and 1970s, 4 polyrhythmic
se comprised largely of hippies and members of anti-establishment  “gtove,” that
“ritsed cheir protest groups. Decame popular
of ernione §
gt SE rig. THE ARCHITECTS OF FUNK
: ek Se
5 SSS LOES James Brown and Sly and the Family Stone, the architects of funk,
ee became popular among the masses during the height of the Black
Power, anti-Vietnam War, and hippie movements. The Black Power Black Power
Bo baw entlebes Movement, spearheaded by members of the Student Nonviolent | Movement
== Ehaiel Baw EES Coordinating Committee (SNCC, an affiliate of the Southern A movement of
it Lope = Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC]), was comprised primarily the late 1960s
oll eee HAI Bie of southern Black college students. Becoming increasingly impatient 4d early 1970s
oe oo ne BEN with the disappointingly slow pace of social change, these students re- mat emphasized
oa Sets eet jected the nonviolent and integrationist approach advocated by civil Black oride
ae ES SES rights leaders. As an alternative, many embraced the Black Nationalist andse
-* a “ ideology of Malcolm X in 1966. Under the rubric of Black Power, its deterrsivinticns.
aeons Sah proponents promoted national Black unity, Black pride, and self.
ee determination (see Portia Maultsby’s discussion in Chapter 10).
wnrnon eas By 1968, many soul and funk musicians, including James Brown and
ge en Sly Stone, had begun to embrace this ideology as reflected in their
lyrics and musical style.
— Whereas the Black Power Movement inspired Brown’s creative
roscvord J. impulse, the Civil Rights and counterculture movements had an
ore“ as che equivalent impact on Sly Stone. Messages of Black pride and commu-
Sh REE nity empowerment permeate many of Brown’s songs, including “Say |
see 6 geet It Loud, ’m Black and I’m Proud” (1968), “I Don’t Want Nobody to |
- There Give Me Nothing (Open up the Door I'll Get It Myself) (1969), and :
<tesud: “Get Up, Get into It, and Get Involved” (1970). His Afro hairstyle, :
Dectame Tart African-oriented fashion, and entrepreneurial business ventures are |
-2 attitude further manifestations of the ideology of Black Power.
wl stvle, In contrast, Sly’s lyric themes of universal love and world peace
o Bae TAR” g promoted by the Civil Rights Movement and the White counterculture
f Sisemeses transcended the ideological divide and agenda of these activist groups.
sev Sauce In “Everyday People” (1969) and “Stand!” (1969), Sly spoke out against
a. Ser hess social injustice and promoted concepts of universal harmony. He also
Bee on the encouraged all races to “Dance to the Music” (1968) because “I Wanna
ioe: Tom tres Take You Higher” (1969). Sly also juxtaposed his integrationist views
> oft fa BE br with the ideology of Black Power. Revealing his political consciousness
eear se fy as a African American male in America, he candidly responded to
Funk = |
i — ———

--- Page 4 ---
!_
society’s racial views in songs such as “Don’t Call Me Nigga, Whitey” = sau ob
(1969), “Thank You (Falettinme Be Mice Elf Agin),” (1970), and 26 te
“Thank You for Talkin’ to Me Africa” (197 1). To paraphrase funk his- a
torian Rickey Vincent, Sly’s music created an atmosphere of tolerance fn
and truth that exposed and thrust the existence and consequence of fret
racism into the pop dialogue like never before.” %
The release of There’s a Riot Goin’ On (197 1) generated consterna- nt
tion among many of Sly’s loyal fans. The hard-driving psychedelic eee
rock-funk orientation of Sly’s earlier productions gave way to an Hc
introspective, laid-back blues-funk style while his themes of univer- “
sal love and harmony were transformed into a critique of society's |
Street beat racial attitudes. “With Rzot,” observed music critic Griel Marcus, 3
A rhythm “Sly gave his audience—particularly his White audience—exactly what
scheme based they didn’t want. What they wanted was an upper, not a portrait of
on syncopated what lay behind the big freaky Black superstar grin that decorated the :
sixteenth-note cover of the album.” In other words, Sly’s fans related largely to his a
pases music and stage persona, ignoring his identity as an African American aes
commonly heard ek : ; -
. male living in a racist society. Thus, Riot became a window into the
in New Orleans
rhythm inner world of Sly Stone, revealing how he negotiated the competing =
and blues. ideological perspectives of integration and nationalism. Such candid 7
Shuffle beat assessments of race relations and racial injustice were common in the i
A rhythm recordings of the first generation of 1970s funk bands, as were the us
scheme based on —- musical influences of both Sly Stone and James Brown. aa
triplet patterns, James Brown and Sly Stone were musical revolutionaries who
associated with broke rules and crossed the boundaries of class, race, and musi- ee
boogie-woogle, cal style. Introducing new rhythmic concepts and timbral qualities Ma
swing, and to rhythm and blues, in the 1960s James Brown redefined African - *
early rhythm American popular music and established the foundation for funk. -
and blues ne
‘ This change was gradual and began with the adoption of rhythmic 20
patterns derived from the marching beat of the Mardi Gras Indians e
Figure 11.1) heard during Mardi Gras celebrations and distinctive to id
New Orleans rhythm and blues (Figure 11.2). Known as the “street 2
beat,” this rhythm consists of syncopated sixteenth-note patterns Ea
played in a linear manner on one oF mote pieces of the drum set. On
James Brown’s recording “I’ve Got Money” (1962), drummer Clayton "os
Figure 11.1 = si,
Marching rhythm :
known as the “street ~
beat.” The note in ,
parentheses is not >
often played. Courtesy
Alexander Stewart. =
Figure 11.2 =
Introduction to _—
“Susie Q” (1961) _e oe ee i .
drum solo played with NR A aaa aaa
brushes. Courtesy swe, cea ba aan a
Alexander Stewart. Hi Hat * "
296 African American Music “iin

--- Page 5 ---
2 Nigga, Whitey” Fillyau introduced this street beat as a substitute for the triple feel
=. (1970), and of the shuffle beat associated with boogie-woogie, swing, and early
z> nrase funk his- rhythm and blues.° Unlike the 12/8 meter and the triplet feel of the
= 2re of tolerance shuffle, the subdivision of beats in 4/4 meter allowed for greater levels
= zonsequence of of syncopation and rhythmic interplay among musicians.
When Fillyau passed his drumming style on to Clyde Stubblefield
--zted consterna- (who replaced him in 1965 in James Brown’s band), the New Orleans
-ong psychedelic street beat became a permanent and focal point of Brown’s funky
cave way to an groove. Alfred “Pee Wee” Ellis, Brown’s former bandleader, explains:
“emes of univer- If, in a studio, you say “play it funky” that could imply almost anything. But
zcue of society’s “give me a New Orleans beat”—you got exactly what you wanted. And Clyde
aL Griel Marcus, Stubblefield was the epitome of this funky drumming. There was a way his beat
o was broken up; a combination of where the bass and the snare drums hit which
= ce~exactly what was topsy-turvy from what had been goin’ on.’
mot a portrait of
>22 decorated the This newly developed aesthetic that later became defined as
2724 largely to his funk was characterized by the interlocking of the drum pattern and
-2ican American a two-bar bass line, counter or contrasting guitar, keyboard and horn
-~adow into the riffs, and a vocalist singing in a gospel style.* As James Brown explains
== the competing in his autobiography, his sound evolved over time: “I had discovered
som. Such candid my strength was not in the horns [a defining feature of rhythm and
>: sommon in the blues], it was in the rhythm. I was hearing everything, even the gui-
s--s. as were the tars, like they were drums....Later on they said it was the beginning of
a. funk. I just thought of it as where my music was going.”®
: -xriematial who Brown’s rhythmic and structural innovations transformed
-zce. and musi- rhythm and blues into a high-energy soul-funk hybrid, which jour-
- cman atl] qualities nalist Cynthia Rose describes as “a dense, blues-based machine, with
-:iefined African a churning rhythm engine and brash punctuation.” This musical
-=:tion for funk. style is evident in Brown’s rhythm and blues and soul hits “Papa’s Got
=t:oa of rhythmic a Brand New Bag” (1965), “Cold Sweat (Part I)” (1967), “There Was
'-2! Gras Indians a Time” (1967), “I Got the Feeling” (1968), “Licking Stick” (1968),
i= distinctive to and “Mother Popcorn” (1969), among many others. To this emerging
--= as the “street musical concept, James Brown’s West Coast counterpart, Sly and the
ain-note patterns Family Stone, added new timbral qualities.
--=2 drum set. On Sly and the Family Stone, an interracial and mixed-gender group
=-:mmer Clayton from San Francisco led by Sly Stone, introduced to funk a unique
bass technique, the technology from rock (wah-wah pedal, fuzz box,
echo chamber, vocal distortion, and so on), and blues-rock flavored
: guitar (“Sex Machine,” 1969). These innovations made Sly’s brand
of funk appealing to White audiences, who related especially to the
group’s rock aesthetic.

Sly Stone’s bassist Larry Graham established a new sound anda
different kind of energy in funk by revolutionizing the approach to
playing the bass. Exploiting the instrument’s rhythmic and timbral
capabilities, he transformed the bass into a percussive instrument

~ >= by pulling, plucking, thumping, and slapping the strings, a tech-
reerere nique he developed while performing in clubs as a duo with his
Funk 297

--- Page 6 ---
mother: “I started to thump the strings with my thumb to make African Americans
up for not having a bass drum.”'' Graham’s percussive playing loose,” “party,” an.
style is heard in the 1969 recordings of “Stand!,” “Hot Fun in the
Summertime,” and “Thank You (Falettinme Be Mice Elf Agin).” Party Themes, Soci
Scores of bass players adopted this technique, which eventually James Brown and S:
became commonplace in funk, jazz, and rock, thereby changing theme in funk int
the sound of African American and American popular music in (1973) and “Jungle
the following decade. Stroke” (1974) ins:
life where funk acc
FUNK LYRICS: CONTENT, MEANING, AND FUNCTION Pirro Aidt.
The lyric content of funk derives primarily from the observations a form of escapist
and experiences of musicians, who provided commentary on urban POCSSLES of daily ~
life, romance, and social, economic, and political issues. Similar dance all night,” ~
to other genres of African American music, funk lyrics served as a yourself” ae
window into the experiences and worldviews of African Americans, fingers, seo uaS |
who historically have used music to express their innermost feelings, ing to funk drum
preserve their identity, and record their history. Funk’s lyrics expose Bohannon observe:
the varying effects the Civil Rights Movement and passage of 1960s my music [“Foot St
Great Society legislation had on African American communities. 1975)] can make E
Historian Joe Trotter contends: “[S]ome middle- and working-class reel happy, it make
blacks gained access to multiracial institutions and moved into inte- wrote “Shine” (197
grated neighborhoods. At the same time, the onslaught of deindus- Troutman wrote“:
trialization undercut the position of black men in heavy industries, 50 people “could :
leaving behind a growing body of permanently unemployed black pands that wrote F
poor.” The growing numbers of the unemployed Black poor paral- Gap Band (“Shake.
leled the recordings of funk groups that spoke out against economic The Black ike
and social injustice. Kool and the Gang asked, “Who’s Gonna Take AGERE COUEES
the Weight” (1970) for the corruption, debt, and society’s social prob- Semugs tlengaa in
lems? Similarly, a year later, War reminded society of the plight of the “pure,” “uncut fu:
poor and the deteriorating conditions of ghettos in “Slipping into values and the frag:
Darkness” (1971) and “The World Is a Ghetto” (1972). an “integrated” BC
Even though the Black middle class made considerable economic FASS pes: (1) selt-.
progress during the 1970s and 1980s, the anti-affirmative action at SORIGHY, and (21,
movement, cultural misunderstandings, the lack of opportunities =e could ;
for advancement, and exclusionary practices in the workplace gen- aa One Marion U
erated frustration, anger, resentment, and debilitating stress among —intens Nationa
this group. The Black working class, whose economic conditions as walks of life, _
turned. catastrophic in the 1980s, shared these feelings but for <Sucational TASES
different reasons. The second recession (1980-1982), ongoing fiscal multiracial instite:
conservatism, and the accumulative impact of deindustrialization — and to adapt t
that thrust many working-class Blacks further onto the margins --Funk became a s
of society facilitated the expansion of what Joe Trotter describes as ste and empower t
the “urban underclass.” The optimism that once prevailed in the ; The song “Ch
middle class transformed into disillusionment, and the unemployed Fane (in reference
abandoned all hope for improved conditions.’* In response to this =2minantly Black’
changed mood, some funk musicians wrote songs that encouraged -=2 Black vote, sit:
298 African American Music 5 ye

--- Page 7 ---
a Ser es lee RE re |
be African Americans from all socioeconomic classes to “dance,” “hang
8 loose,” “party,” and be happy.
. Party Themes, Social and Political Commentary |
he James Brown and Sly and the Family Stone first popularized the “party” |
ee theme in funk in the late 1960s. Kool and The Gang’s “Funky Stuff” |
= (1973) and “Jungle Boogie” (1973), and Parliament’s “Up for the Down
Stroke” (1974) institutionalized this theme within Black community |
life where funk acquired the labels “happy music” and “party music.”
__ For many African Americans of all socioeconomic classes, funk became
_ a form of escapism: a temporary respite from the uncertainties and —
pressures of daily life. The recurrent chanted lyrics of “party,” “dance, |
a dance all night,” “let yourself go,” “give up the funk,” and “release '
-_ yourself” encouraged kinetic expressions (clapping hands, snapping
_. fingers, stomping feet, and waving arms and hands), which, accord-
- ing to funk drummer Hamilton Bohannon, signified being happy. |
7 Bohannon observes: “It takes a lot to be happy—it’s hard being happy. If
a my music [“Foot Stompin’ Music” (1975) and “Bohannon’s Beat (Pt.1)” —
(1975)] can make people move a little bit, bounce around a little and |
_ feel happy, it makes me really happy.” In a similar vein, the Bar-Kays
~ : wrote “Shine” (1978) “to give people some hope and help” and Roger
Troutman wrote “I Can Make You Dance” (1983), performed by Zapp, q
- so people “could forget about their problems by dancing.”!” Other
- bands that wrote party funk songs from this perspective include the
~ - Gap Band (“Shake,” 1979) and Roger (“So Ruff, So Tuff,” 1981). q
_. The Black Nationalist ideology advanced by the Black Power
_ Movement contributed to funk’s lyric content, as incorporated by
; 7 George Clinton in developing a unique funk style known as P-Funk P-Funk
. (“pure,” “uncut funk”), Responding to the erosion of Black cultural - Short for “pure
a values and the fragmentation of Black communities thatresultedfrom funk,” a style
an “integrated” society, Clinton’s lyrics reflected two broad political pioneered by
_ concepts: (1) self-liberation from the social and cultural restrictions George Clinton, a
. of society, and (2) the creation of new social spaces in which African Whose lyrics
Americans could redefine themselves and celebrate their Blackness ae | |
. “As One Nation Under a Groove” (an imaginary Black community). desermination !
a Clinton’s Nationalist views resonated with African Americans from and Kberatidn’
- all walks of life, including teenagers enrolled in predominately White z=
2. educational institutions. Similar to Black professionals working in | |
- multiracial institutions, many felt “pressured to give up their identi- |
ties and to adapt to the surrounding white culture....”!8 The lyrics of _
. P-Funk became a source of encouragement for Black people to liber- 4
. ate and empower themselves as a unified community. a,
- The song “Chocolate City” (1975) from the album of the same ! |
. title (in reference to Washington, D.C., and other cities with a pre- |
; dominantly Black population), for example, emphasizes the power of =.
_ the Black vote, situating “Blacks in places where you don’t conceive :
, |
Funk 299
a

--- Page 8 ---
of them being.”!? In this song, Clinton alludes to the potential of coded (2
electing a Black President with Aretha Franklin as First Lady, and zroues 2
appointing Muhammad Ali, Reverend Ike, Richard Pryor, and Stevie Ban Keres
Wonder as Cabinet members in the “Black House” (instead of the ass Sous
White House). In subsequent albums, he created stories that inter- oes
twined the party theme with social realities and fantasies featuring ar Me
Black mythical heroes and villains.” The albums Mothership Connection
: (1975) and The Clones of Dr. Funkenstein (1976) by Parliament situate SERECF,
African Americans in a spaceship on an imaginary planet, and Motor a
Booty Affair (1978) places them underwater. Using humor, metaphor, a
coded language, and creative word play such as “groovallegiance,” ee :
“funkentelechy,” “prosifunkstication,” and “psychoalphadiscobeta- ee
bioaquadoloop” in the critique of political and social issues, Clinton a
contends: “We try to not preach but we try to bring them up.””* an
Clinton’s blend of realism and intellectualism appealed to members mS
of all Black social and economic classes, who were aroused and cul- an
turally liberated by his Black Nationalist message—a message that oo
Rickey Vincent interprets through the lens of African cosmology (the a
concept of “oneness”) and African religious systems (the transform- oe
ing power of funk). cor
African concepts of cosmology also inspired the lyric content of oS
the 1970s funk bands, especially the songs of Earth, Wind & Fire. The ae >
group’s leader and primary songwriter Maurice White describes him- a
self as a person who “wants the best for the world and himself, who is pie
very conscious on a humanitarian level, and who really thinks about oo
the creator, the stars, the moon and other planets, the universe as well oS ~
as the existence of other planetary beings.” Influenced by Egyptian
cosmology, his reflections on broad universal issues underscore the So
themes of his songs. Many encourage society to develop an awareness =
of self, of others, and the surrounding world as means of achieving oe
world peace, harmony, and love. “Keep Your Head to the Sky” (1973), nT
“Shining Star” (1975), and “That’s the Way of the World” (1975S) ——
by Earth Wind & Fire are among the group’s many recordings that ee
embody White’s philosophy.” SO
Male and Female Relationships oo
The culture of the urban working class, the primary consumers of funk, °
also inspired the lyric content of funk. The Ohio Players, for example, -
drew from the street culture of Dayton to create funk songs that per- ~
sonified the culture of the city’s hustlers and “players,” men who engage i
in superficial relationships with several women simultaneously.”
The song “Skin Tight” (1974) describes the movements of women
clothed in attire that reveals the curvature of the body, whereas “Jive ;
Turkey” (1974) speaks of deceitful women. Other songs such as “Fire” .
| (1975), “Fopp” (1975), “Honey” (1975), “Sweet Sticky Thing” (1975), —-
and “Angel” (1977) extol sexual pleasures using double entendre or 7
300 African American Music
a  —

--- Page 9 ---
rirential or coded language.> Funk ballads as well as the up-tempo songs of other
- tay and groups describe the trials and tribulations of romantic encounters: The
- end Stevie Bar-Kays in “Too Hot to Trot” (1976) and “Hit and Run” (1981); the
s#222 Of the Gap Band in “Burn Rubber On Me (Why Do You Wanna Hurt Me)”
: tnat inever- (1981), “Early in the Morning” (1982), and “You Dropped a Bomb
2} Te2turing on Me” (1982); and Cameo in “Back and Forth” (1987).
Peewee AOE
~ ant situate PERFORMANCE AESTHETIC: STAGE PRODUCTIONS OF FUNK
an a ae eT INA
ae ~-fotor Funk musicians describe stage productions of funk as a form of
= Soe Sap nae theater.* Larry Blackman, the leader of Cameo, explains: “We go
| Saar NEE beyond the visual rhythm and blues groups in that we are all highly
aceaniaiaideall attuned to the art of showmanship. The way we emphasize emotions
=F as and moods, build momentum, utilize costumes and Pace ourselves
sees UP. is very close to the traditional concept of theater.””” Stage presenta- |
“= suembers tions of funk became full-scale spectacles. The coordinated costumes |
sec and cul- and conservative lighting, sound and visual effects associated with
om TPEgS thar traditional rhythm and blues and soul groups gave way to flashy, in-
ms ws EY the dividualistic, and sometimes outlandish costumes, elaborate stage
| ae a Props and lighting design, and audio and visual effects comparable
. to those of rock groups and Broadway musicals such as The Wiz. The
= tee tera Pall Ohio Players and Earth, Wind & Fire reportedly were the first funk
se = ae The bands to stage such theatrical productions, each reflecting its own
tees him- stoup persona as well as the content of their song lyrics.?8
"2.2. who is The Ohio Players adopted their name and persona from Dayton’s
FEES about local players, who dressed in the latest fashions, drove the newest cars,
| aes ee and projected a street image popularized in the Hollywood “blaxploi-
a ogy pa tation” film Superfly (1972). This movie portrays the protagonist,
=2rscore the Youngblood Priest, as a lady’s man who wore white suits and shoes,
von Bi era gold accessories, large hats with feathers, and oversized tie sticks,
a Ear and drove an “El Dog” (Eldorado) with custom headlights. The cast
> ia uo of supporting characters were outfitted in colorful suits. Dressed in
es 19.5 tuxedoes, furs, hats, diamond rings, and other fashionable “street”
rings that attire on album jackets and on stage, the Ohio Players’ live produc-
tions featured light shows, sounds effects, and expensive stage props.
According to Keith Harrison of Dayton:
-27s orfunk. The Players was the first group to use lasers. People never knew thar. They had
fo ne le, mirrors set up and used laser lights way back then and before productions
ce _—e became a big thing. The Players painted all their equipment white, which brought
ngS -GeT Per another brightness to the stage. They started adding the siren to “Fire.” On
“ro emgage “Skin Tight,” Marshall came out and blew a tuba. They were adding other things
‘-s-soausly-- to try to make to make their stage production a little bigger because Earth, Wind
. ait ae fas SH & Fire was their biggest competitor when it came to stage production.”
esses Jae In contrast to the “player” image Projected by the Ohio Players, the
oe we group Earth, Wind & Fire became known for its space-age and fucur-
“ge Te. istic characterizations. They wore sequined white and bright-colored
eccenene Gf . skin-tight, big-lapelled jackets, and bellbottom pants, accessorized
Funk 301 1
eens

--- Page 10 ---
with streamers and platform shoes. Describing a performance of the ant erie S
group, Rickey Vincent recalls: “Stage props lifted the players to the ooes Be
rafters, spun the drum sets upside down, and beamed the band mem- 2 aoe
bers out of cylinders on stage.”*° Funk stage productions became EsSumes T:
even more elaborate when George Clinton mounted his 1976 P-Funk Some
Earth Tour. Reportedly the most expensive production of any funk Pn BESTT
band, Fred Wesley, composer-arranger—trombonist for James Brown, geereB &, Eg
Bootsy’s Rubber Band, and George Clinton’s P-Funk Horns, describes ‘2S Bie
it as an unprecedented extravaganza.*" fe TS
Clinton’s show required a weekly payroll of $75,000 (a handsome PS a
amount in 1976) for the entourage of 88 instrumentalists, singers, Ting 28522
and crew. It featured elaborate props and costumes designed to com- TEL BOS De:
plement the concept albums (a collection of songs based on a theme ages ae *
that is reflected in the albums’ cover design and graphics) in their SickA,
repertoire.” For example, the story of Mothership Connection (1975) oe Gash.
unfolds around an imaginary planet. Clinton, as Dr. Funkenstein,
and his crew return to earth to bring back the funk—the aesthetic _azz-Der.
sensibility, social values, cultural traditions, and spiritual force—that, see
in earlier centuries, had sustained and empowered African Americans De.
as slaves. Some members of the band assume the characters of space an .
aliens with wings/fins, a clown, an Arab in faded purple, and an earth- es .
ling in a floor-length, black velvet, gold-trimmed dashiki with white ge.
alligator-skin platform boots. ee
Stage props for the P-Funk Earth Tour were as elaborate as ee
those used in European opera productions. They included a giant by mee Sg
12-foot-high platform boot, a silver car, and a baby spaceship sus- eee
pended by wire over the audience and rigged to fly from the back of So
the venue to join with the Mothership (which cost $250,000). Fred nee
Wesley recalls: “The gargantuan Mothership hung out of sight over Do mee
the stage... [appearing] to land... at the appropriate moment, deliver- ge mt
ing Dr. Funkenstein, who wore a white fur coat, white fur hat, and a, ” oat
long, dark brown wig.”** When the Mothership lands, a battery of —
synthesizers produces an array of sound effects accentuated by spec- go ge
tacular and colorful flashing lights, lasers, smoke machines and a _
other props. ** P-Funk productions were mesmerizing and they led to se ne Eg
a movement where audiences began “to adopt that P-Funk attitude oo bet :
Groove and dress like P-Funk, act like P-Funk, and talk the P-Funk talk.”® ” i garg
Polyrhythmic Thus, P-Funk became a movement based on a concept that embodied Ni - - -
foundation built a philosophy, attitude, culture, and musical style.
on.a syncopated 7
bass line that GENERAL MUSICAL FEATURES -
locks with the . . a
| se By 1975, the sound of funk bands had crystallized as a distinctive style oe
, pattern and is characterized by a set of aesthetic features that identified funk as a mu- ——
| accompanied sical genre: rhythm takes a definitive hierarchical position over melody; 7
| by a heavy the musical foundation centers on a “groove” (a repetitive, syncopated, : ~
| back-beat. and polyrhythmic pattern onto which other independent rhythms aa
|
302 African American Music
at oe = : : a

--- Page 11 ---
Titmanie rithe are layered); the sound is highly percussive in quality; the bass func-
bs om pee peg oe whe, tions as a melodic instrument; the harmonic Progression is reduced to
tat race tex. a minimum, often centering on one or two chords; and group singing
aSPRE St geme assumes prominence over lead vocals.
Sale $ oeSRk Some funk songs are constructed tightly, with an extended
(tr PP gerfenk A section and a shorter “bridge” or B section that returns to the A
it ames Brown, section, as heard in James Brown’s “Get Up (I Feel Like Being a Sex
A - --: fescrthes Machine)” ( 1970). Other songs employ free-form grooves consisting
of improvised exchanges among musicians, as illustrated in The Ohio
"3 =:-dsome Players’ “Pain” (1971) and “Jive Turkey” (1974). Even though many
TTLusts. singers, fans associate funk with up-tempo party music, the genre includes
-)ocneZ ro com- ballads performed ina slow or moderate tempo, employing a standard
Wk 2.2 cheme four-line verse-chorus structure or a variation thereof (for example,
zreccs in their Earth, Wind & Fire’s “Reasons,” 1975; Gap Band’s “Yearning,” 1981 :
cme (1975) the Bar-Kays’ “Attitudes,” 1977; and Cameo’s “Sparkle,” 1979),
> Fumsenstein.,
s—t72 aesthetic Jazz-Derived Funk
3. Torce—thar, Throughout the 1970s, funk sounds began emerging in various
"52 Americans regions of the country. They mirrored the musical background of
“iit28 of space performers, many of whom were jazz, blues, rhythm and blues, soul,
- in 4an earth- and blues-rock-oriented. Crossing rigid musical categories, funk
os. with white musicians fused and reformulated elements from these and other
idioms in ways that produced various hybrid funk styles. Former
= ¢.aDorate as jazz musicians such as The J.B.’s James Brown’s backup band); Kool
svonéd & Biatit & the Gang; Earth, Wind & Fire; and The Ohio Players, for exam-
sraceship —— ple, incorporated jazz-oriented solos, Kansas City Swing horn riffs Riff
io tte back of (repetitive syncopated motifs), and bebop phrasings, and they framed A short,
== ..J00). Frec and prioritized these elements in different ways over individualized recurrent
-: 27 sight over funk grooves. Some songs, for example, feature melodic, bebop-in- melodic =
“sent, deliver- spired, phrase-length horn lines (sometimes alternating with horn __ "hythmic phrase.
“i Soe Hae, and riffs); others highlight syncopated riff-oriented horn arrangements.
$2 Dattery of The former is illustrated in The J.B’s “Gimme Some More” (1971),
".2zed by spec- Kool and the Gang’s “Love the Life You Live, Pts. 182” (1971) and
“acnines and “Open Sesame” (1976), and The Ohio Players’ “Skin Tight” (1974)
zx.2 they led to and “Fire” (1974). The latter is heard in James Brown’s “Soul Power,
F2nX attitude Pts. 1&2” (1971) and Earth, Wind & Fire’s “Shining Star” (1975).
Funk talk." Describing the relationship between funk and jazz, Fred Wesley
>t embodiec contends these two genres
-.are basically the same thing, with emphasis on different elements and playing
with different attitudes. Jazz is cool and slick and subtle, emphasizing the me-
lodic and harmonic side of the music. Funk is bold, arrogant, and aggressive,
. emphasizing the hard downbeats and tricky rhythms of the music, and tends to
-izactive style appeal more to the boory-shaking listener. I submit that there is a very thin line
- Sank as amu- separating the two schools of music appreciation.
: wanton . Adhering to this principle, Wesley’s arrangements blur the
cent rhythms lines of genre demarcation: “In most cases, you can say without
Funk 303
nnn

--- Page 12 ---
po -_
|
|
| contradiction that I was using jazz theories for the horns against ac che we
funk rhythm tracks.” *° faster Tamu
| Rhythm and Blues-Derived Funk . edt -
| The Ohio Players, former blues, rhythm and blues, and jazz perform- eg Tae
ers, developed a distinctive funk style by reformulating and combining De ag” <2
elements from these idioms with an innovative funk groove. Describing JUugreacte 7
this sound as R&B, bass player Marshall Jones contends: “We didn’t de ge
have a definition for funk.” The bluesy guitar style, the prominence of exnloimec
a brassy horn sound, and the drum pattern are the core elements that = peg
identify the rhythm and blues roots of the Ohio Players’ brand of funk. ne the ore:
The drum pattern (bass drum on beat one followed by an eight-note “jeae Hex >
anticipation of beat three; the fourth beat is often silent and the snare = ae
drum emphasizes beats two and four) locks with the syncopated, re- hmericen
petitive bass line, which drives the groove over which polyrhythmic 7
structures are provided by the horns, keyboards, and guitar. The songs ae
“Pain” (1971) and “Jive Turkey” (1974) illustrate these features. The a
R&B-oriented funk style, later known as “Dayton Street Sound,” was “Mena
preserved by the second generation of funk bands, who were mentored pee f:
, by The Ohio Players. These groups include Slave (“Slide,” 1977 and PSicen
“The Party Song,” 1978) and Lakeside (“It’s All the Way Live,” 1978). oo
In addition to the Dayton groups, the R&B-funk fusion style became a a
signature sound for southern-based funk groups. oe
In Memphis (Stax Records), the Bar-Kays, the former backup mg wee ol
band for Otis Redding, were the epitome of a high-energy R&B-funk "dese Bln
fusion style. Prominently featuring a brassy horn section over a waeda®
funk groove, this style generated many hits for the group, including eee
“Too Hot to Stop” (1976), “Shake Your Rump to the Funk” (1976), Daa aid
and “Move Your Boogie Body” (1979). A similar R&B-funk sound is a
heard in “Ffun” (1977) by Con Funk Shun, a funk band from north- 2Funk
ern California who worked as session musicians at Stax Records. othe, “Es
Gospel-Influenced and Rock-Influenced Funk ~ aap he
The rhythm and blues recordings produced at Stax Records in the _ weer
early to mid-1960s contributed to the transformation of rhythm vee rote
and blues into soul, which has its roots in Black gospel music. Some on Bee
funk musicians, notably Graham Central Station and the Isley -ooep ch,
Brothers, incorporated the vocal stylings, percussive timbres, and aspen es
“Shout” rhythm “shout” rhythms of the Black folk church into their productions, tos creat
A fast, highly- ; 7
syncopated generating a high-energy, spirit-filled, gospel-funk sound. These “Ads
rhythm shout rhythms, which accompany the holy dance common to the ‘ze
associated with worship practices of Black Pentecostal and Sanctified churches, are -t--: ct:
ecstatic worship highly syncopated and played in a fast tempo ranging from 116 to mom,
styles in African 144 BPM (beats per minute). Shout rhythm tempos are in contrast 3 es
American to the slower tempos of 108 and 126 BPM common in the record- peqiren:
churches. ings of most funk groups, excluding P-Funk recordings that center oooeter
| 304 African American Music Zoe,
pe

--- Page 13 ---
che horns against on the metronome count of 88 BMP and rarely exceed 104 BPM. The
faster tempo, gospel-inflected vocal styling, and use of tambourines
characterize the unique style of Graham Central Station, illustrated
in such songs as “Release Yourself” (1974), “It’s Alright” (1975), and
and jazz perform- “The Jam” (1975). The recordings “Fight the Power” (1975) and “The
--z and combining Pride” (1977) by the Isley Brothers, a former gospel quartet, also
_crpove. Describing illustrate this gospel-oriented funk sound.
--ends: “We didn’t As an admirer of rock guitarist Jimi Hendrix, George Clinton
"he prominence of exploited the rock aesthetic—rhythms, guitar style, and sound distor-
-ore elements that tion—in funk. Although most rock historians and fans identify rock
vers’ brand of funk. as the creation of White musicians, a performance of Black guitarist
-2 >v an eight-note Jimi Hendrix in New York around 1965 led P-Funk pioneer George
- ent and the snare Clinton and his friends to conclude that rock is a form of African
:22 syncopated, re- American musical expression rooted in the blues tradition:
casa polythythmic We realized that, that [rock] was the new thing, it was loud blues. That’s when I
2 Zuitar, The songs realized it was psychedelic. It was basic loud blues and a good show, good show-
--=se features. The men. All the blues guys could play behind their head and in their teeth but he
Screet Sound,” was [Hendricks] was the one right on time. He got the right sound and if it hadn’t
ok 5 suave mentored been for him, we’d have lost blues like a mother.”
‘Sude,” 1977 and Clinton established the presence of the rock tradition in funk
“ay Live,” 1978). through the recordings of Funkadelic (“I Wanna Know if It’s Good
-.22 style became a to You,” 1970; “Cosmic Slop,” 1973; “Whatever Makes Baby Feel
Good,” 1974; and “Who Says a Funk Band Can’t Play Rock,” 1978).
2 former backup The rock-oriented guitar style is employed in some recordings of
energy R&B-funk other funk groups, including the Ohio Players’ “Fopp” (1975), Slave’s
pak RARE Mev © “Slide” (1977), Rick James’ “Love Gun” (1979), Prince’s “Little Red
2 group, including Corvette” (1982) and “When Doves Cry” (1984), and Cameo’s “Talkin’
ine Funk” (1976), Out the Side of Your Neck” (1984),
> ss3-funk sound is
- >and from north- P-Funk
> Scax Records. P-Punk builds on the musical foundation established by James Brown
and Sly Stone. The signature James Brown sound is preservedinP-Funk = us
in the horn arrangements of Fred Wesley Jr., the saxophone solos of Synthesizer
22x Records in the Maceo Parker, the percussive bass riffs of William “Bootsy” Collins,and | Anyelectronic . .
ration of rhythm the guitar style of Phelps “Catfish” Collins, all of whom left Brown to musical
=> spel music. Some join Clinton’s organization. The rock and psychedelic timbres of P-Funk instrume: nt that
-.: and the Isley reveal the influences of Jimi Hendrix and Sly Stone. Expanding on the “synthesizes”
-ssicve timbres, and traditional funk aesthetic, Clinton introduced new concepts regarding 9 “PE STEAEGS It
_ ‘ . . sounds through
cn2ir productions, the treatment of tempo (discussed earlier), texture, and timbre. The “sinned dads
“x sound. These musical textures in P-Funk are sparse and light, resulting from the spac- fe wing Ae ”
22 common to the ing of short, repetitive, and stratified melodic motifs of guitars and performer to
<:zzed churches, are horns, as heard in Brides of Funkenstein’s “Disco to Go” (1978). "vary pitch,
:cing from 116 to A major feature of the P-Funk sound is the use of varying timbral timbre, attack,
‘ros are in contrast qualities produced by modern musical technologies. Employing Black decay, and other
cron in the record- aesthetic principles, keyboardist Bernie Worrell treats synthesizers as__. basi¢ sound ap
-rrdings that center an extension of the voice, bass, guitar, and horns, generating an array _ elements. :
Funk 305
ae

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 11.3 Panes ee oe Disco-Influenced z
Sheet music cover fod alee | he By 1980, maj
for “Flash Light,” ene e TS oan ” » Major |
ar ppia by Ae a Worisand Music by * = oe production a
Parliament (1 978), a oe Dee aed ; broadening the «
fo executives tacitly r
elaborate stage Re _ ; , )
costumes. Courtesy ie aa ae homogenized sou
David A. Jasen. — ae % Pa became beholden
, en Pea Mi
F Pe Py «' nf >: . Mf A p me F . A critic Nelson Geor
=. hl le Mt re Be. The trend toward |
me a ieee in musical techno
4 e 4 : L ; i . a ee B || tro-pop style, inflt
' +. r yi ee Aik ue! cal direction of mi
: ‘ - - Z : 7 ad i 4 hy) oe Chapter 12). Grov
' wel ee ee) yr late 1970s, compu
4 ae ef s ee ar was more infectio
oo ae ; lai ee se Ls
a * ee. we that musicians act
‘ao Ae of the Ohio Player
ee 5 a . foe ho yee
a  B many funk bands:
ee as :
ae ing hotn players w
ko = the funk groove. h
——— experienced diffict
of timbres such as growls, slides, trills, screeches, and unusual sound redefining their se
effects. Worrell’s omnipresent synthesized strings add interesting wd e funk pee
colors, textures, and timbres to chanted vocal lines and distorted bass a . uring this tr
lines, as well as to the improvised call-response interplay between the - i Jones recall:
rhythm and horn sections. Parliament’s “Chocolate City” (1975) and ad aesthetic] =
. . . s . i “6
“Plash Light” (1978) (Figure 11.3) illustrate this technologically based =u - iSco-oniented :
P-Funk aesthetic. - ileal avered 5
Textural and timbral variety is commonly used in P-Funk asa device a satwene s “Boog:
x 5 ‘ ‘ av j qi
for mood change. It is achieved by superimposing a spoken voice (often i eae
distorted) over group singing, suddenly shifting from the group sound = eae, eet
with full instrumentation to a “rap” section accompanied by sparse ° Sound of Mu
instrumentation, and alternating melodic horn phrasings with percus- = e Summertitr
sive riffs. These various features are heard in Parliament’s “Mothership a overtones) o:
Connection” (1975), “Night of the Thumpasorus People” (1975), - ~S, ty
“Sir Nose D’Voidoffunk” (1977), and “Rumpofsteelskin” (1979). ther funk g:
In funk, George Clinton and his P-Funk aggregate creatively m packs len eler
exploited modern technology. This use of technology followed Stevie 7 a the late 137 0
Wonder’s introduction of the clavinet and synthesizers in the al- © Memphis
bums Talking Book (1972) and Innervisions (1973). Wonder’s use of — and Dane:
modern technologies in Black popular music influenced the employ- “on ana " heav;
ment of the clavinet and synthesizers in the funk recordings of the os ey (1979),
Commodotres (“Machine Gun,” 1974; “Slippery When Wet,” 1975), —_ Me )and
among other groups. - "2 on Your Minx
306 African American Music 2,

--- Page 15 ---
Disco-Influenced and Electro-Funk: The 1980s
By 1980, major White record companies had begun to dominate |
the production and marketing of Black music with the intent of !
broadening the consumer base for this music. Record company |
executives tacitly required Black groups to produce a slicker and more }
homogenized sound for mass marketing. Thus, many Black artists
became beholden to crossover formulas, which resulted in aesthetic Crossover
changes in the “soul” of Black popular music, a concept that cultural The process
critic Nelson George describes as “The Death of Rhythm and Blues.” © by whicha
The trend toward crossover productions, coupled with advancements recording
in musical technology and the emergence of disco as a distinct elec. | ‘eleased in
tro-pop style, influenced the reconfiguration and shifts in the musi- | # ene.
: cal direction of many funk bands (see Kai Fikentscher’s discussion in '#"*et achieves
Chapter 12). Group-oriented singing gave way to lead vocals. By the ts sraus i the
: mainstream
late 1970s, computers began replacing bass players because the “beat vnecrbest.
was more infectious [and] computers could do things rhythmically Discs
| that musicians actually can’t do,” according to bassist Marshall Jones Category of
of the Ohio Players.*! To remain competitive against the disco craze, 1970s dance
many funk bands incorporated disco elements in their music, replac- music, derived
ing horn players with synthesizers and juxtaposing disco rhythms in _ from the
the funk groove. In the 1980s decade of musical change,some bands _ abbreviation of
experienced difficulty preserving the traditional funk aesthetic while discotheque, the
os sound redefining their sound using crossover formulas. man Venu of
ee The funk group Dayton from Ohio, for example, reached matu- _ CO"SUMPtion.
cto rity during this transitional period. Trumpet and keyboard player
oes ass Chris Jones recalls: “There wasn’t a whole lot of deep funk [1970s
ae Set funk aesthetic] with Dayton.” Dayton’s use of advanced technolo-
. eS gy, disco-oriented string arrangements, and the disco beat produced
coe a disco-flavored sound with less obvious funk roots. Similar to
a Heatwave’s “Boogie Nights” (1977) and “The Groove Line” (1978),
sas adevice ; ; ;
(Loss after Dayton’s musical style leaned more toward the disco sound with
a ' Jazz overtones, as represented in “I Got My Eye on You” (1980) and
von SORTS “The Sound of Music” (1984). However, their biggest hit, “Hot Fun
- a “parse in the Summertime” (1982), represents a pop interpretation (with
ee disco overtones) of a funk song first recorded by Sly and The Family
_ “ee “ Stone.
a cadtl Other funk groups experimented with crossover formulas by
Te incorporating elements from pop, rock, and disco, some as ear-
—— ly as the late 1970s. For example, the first charted Top 10 singles
= een Rei of the Memphis-based group Con Funk Shun, “Ffun” (1977) and
~ we o “Shake and Dance with Me” (1978), featured a prominent horn
= 2 “ section and a heavy 1970s funk groove. A year later, with the release
2 emplov- 2 : ; .
ones oF the of Candy (1979), the group began experimenting with disco beats
me 1975 (“Chase Me”) anda rock guitar solo over a quasi-ballad (“Let Me Put
7 — Love on Your Mind”).
Funk 307

--- Page 16 ---
| _
In 1985, Mercury Records attempted to recast Con Funk Shun talk box 2s:
as a “pop” group, as evidenced by the promotional materials that funk sournc-
accompanied the release of Fever (1985): vocal and :7
Since singing with Mercury in 1976 and releasing their debut LP, Con Funk this instrux.
Shun...the band became known for their horn-driven funk sound, but recently to the Ces:
they’ve played down that element somewhat, while still remaining decidedly and “Dance
funky. On the new LP, only one song features brass. “We’ve used more synthe- Senfiex
sizers instead” explained vocalist Felton Pilate. “This way the LP sounds more . ——
pop, which is what we want.” Time were |
. . eclectic rer:
Despite the promotional hype of Mercury and Con Funk Shun’s 7 | fh .
s cMrpte go05
creative efforts to appeal to a broad consumer market, the result was ?
-_ . and rock. 2
less successful than anticipated. Candy reached the number 7 posi- “ti eo:
. . 5 His rock r=
tion on the R&B charts and number 46 on Billboard’s Pop charts; ae
we . cunk-derive:
Fever was shy of the number 100 position, claming the number 105 aaa
. . Crv 198= .
spot on the Pop charts in comparison to number 12 on the R&B “ _
. 8 . crossover 7:
charts. These figures suggest that Con Funk Shun’s “new” musical 2eB and?
oe se R&B and Fe
direction represented a superficial treatment of pop and rock ele- 1
‘ . oo . 1 Cons
ments rather than a major change in musical direction. The group’s oo
. . ‘ ‘ woe Lime. 2
music remained closely aligned with the rhythm and blues-funk ;
‘ ' . . . 4s sized dance
aesthetic, which resonated more with African Americans than it did _
: . . Graham Ce
with the programmers and listeners of Top 40 radio. re
. . ‘ aoar Tine 2
Even though crossover formulas, as described in the promotional 5 WE
. . ; Logical in-o
materials that accompanied the release of Con Funk Shun’s Fever =k s ;
. Funk sound
(1985), deemphasized the use of horns—a feature central to the 1970s sett
. . . 2s a disting
funk aesthetic—some groups did so for economic and creative reasons. . 4
. . sa3 drum
Record labels reduced production budgets and their support of : |
: : . . “P.anet Roe.
national tours. The musical preference of audiences shifted toward a _
: Le . ‘ : Sorope Exs
synthesized aesthetic, in part, due to the popularity of disco. Despite - ?
Patrol Pla
the attempts of record labels to broaden the consumer base for Black “a 1982,
music, the audience for funk remained primarily African American. ae . 7
From a creative perspective, many funk bands used technology —e ee
to modernize the traditional funk sound and in ways that preserved The Funk C
and further accentuated the music’s core aesthetic. The Bar-Kays, a
for example, combined synthesizers with the traditional funk in- al
. ; rolpuval 72!
strumentation by arranging “horns as though they were an elec- "om emme
tronic instrument like synthesizers and mixed them in.”“ They also ee
blended the electric bass with synthesized bass lines, which produced _ ” B98
new textures and added depth to the music’s foundation (“Hit and ot Som,
. ; Z.onald Rez
Run,” 1981). When the group substituted synthesizers for horns, they 3 . _
retained the function and percussive quality of the horn aesthetic, as -_ ~ _
“Vocoder/voice on “Sexomatic” (1984) and “Freakshow on the Dance Floor” (1984). Pe erdan -
box Taking a different approach, Roger and Zapp (two distinct groups eS
‘An electronic comprised. of the Troutman brothers from Dayton, Ohio) used ad- —
. . . 2S ae
_ device that is vanced technologies to create an electro-based Dayton Street Funk ” cmon wale
used to distort ~~ style, Influenced by the P-Funk aesthetic, Roger began experimenting ran.
ee vocal Bul with technology in the mid-1970s to “find new ways to express words Sees os
es in music.”*’ Shortly afterward, he mastered the vocoder, an electronic —*
308 African American Music ar

--- Page 17 ---
inx Shun talk box (also known as the voice box) that became the locus of Roger’s
ais that funk sound—a sound that emphasized a heavy bottom and distorted
vocal and instrumental timbres. Roger and his brothers popularized

a Bast this instrument and other synthesized technologies in “More Bounce
2 recency to the Ounce” (1980), “I Heard It Through the Grapevine” (1981),
ei cedly and “Dance Floor” (1982),
- whe Similar to Roger and Zapp, the productions of Prince and The
a Time were heavily synthesized, yet different in style. Creating an
So, eclectic repertoire of electro-funk in the albums 1999 (1982) and
PARTS Purple Rain (1984), Prince incorporated elements of rhythm and blues
oeaet Was and rock, a concept first popularized by Sly and The Family Stone.
“ - P os His rock rhythms and guitar aesthetic juxtaposed and blended with
= oe funk-derived rhythms (“Little Red Corvette,” 1982; “When Doves
open Cry,” 1984), which appealed to broad audiences and generated several
— ie crossover Top 20 hits, two in number 1 positions on both Billboard’s

mene R&B and Pop charts.
oS In contrast to Prince’s electro rhythm and blues-rock aesthetic,
Ee “SE . The Time, a protégé of Prince, evolved a distinctive style of synthe-
ees sized dance funk by employing church flavorings reminiscent of
a Graham Central Station and high-tech sound effects in the albums

oe i What Time Is It? (1982) and Ice Cream Castles (1984). Although the techno-
~ " — logical innovations of the 1980s funk musicians modernized the 1970s
— a : funk sound, hip-hop DJ Afrika Bambaataa established electro-funk
- oO . as a distinctive funk style by incorporating programmed synthesizers
oe ! and drum machines. Afrika Bambaataa & The Soul Sonic Force’s i
oo “Planet Rock” (1982), a reworking of Kraftwerk’s space-oriented “Trans-
oT { Europe Express” (1977), provided the model for similar works by Planet
__ oe. _ i Patrol (“Play at Your Own Risk,” 1982) and The Jonzun Crew (“Pack
ae | Jam,” 1982). Electro-funk recordings and the recordings of established
ae _ funk groups became integral to the soundtrack of hip-hop culture. |
SRE ER me The Funk Continuum in 1990s Hip-Hop
ae ] t Both funk and hip-hop defy mainstream musical conventions and
“se a i cultural restrictions. Both were the creations of African American
~ — i males, many of whom lived in deteriorating inner-city communi-
~ } ties during eras of economic and social change. The second reces-
- ae | sion (1980-1982), ongoing fiscal and social conservatism, President
~ oo i Ronald Reagan’s gradual dismantling of affirmative action programs,
a j and the accumulative impact of de-industrialization that thrust the
: a 7 poor and working-class Blacks into severe poverty, set the stage for the :
a ‘ coalescing of funk and hip-hop. The abandoned factories, boarded
ae q buildings, dilapidated houses, drug addicts, and the homeless were
a i common sights of community devastation and chaos. Within the
ooo context of poverty and disillusionment, funk, as observed by philoso-
“ - 7, i pher Cornell West, became “a way of sustaining the everyday rituals
oo ; of Black folks. It...comforts a wounded folk.”

t
Funk 309

Sean nnn rrnernemeenemnee

--- Page 18 ---
As an alternative form of cultural expression, funk and hip-hop an urban form
provided new social spaces for African Americans to heal their social and eco:
wounds through the process of self-empowerment. Although most 1964 Civil Rig:
funk bands had begun to disappear from the popular soundscape in and disillusion
the mid-1980s, largely due to changes in the musical preferences of equality. Even <
consumers, hip-hop DJs and computer programmers revived the funk dance floor pe:
aesthetic in the late 1980s by sampling the heavy funk beats; funky communicate =
bass lines; guitar, keyboards, and horn riffs; and sung and spoken and the call re
phrases. Reformulating these materials, DJs created new musical Movement of t:
tracks that brought the historical past into the present, reviving a The funk -
1960s Black consciousness in the process (see Dawn M. Norfleet’s ues of the Artz:
discussion of hip-hop and rap in Chapter 14). James Brown (“Funky as funk’s socic
Drummer,” 1969; “The Payback,” 1973; and “Get Up, Get into It, Get es, including »
Involved,” 1970), George Clinton (“Atomic Dog,” 1982; and “Flash from their inz
Light,” 1978), Ohio Players (“Funky Worm,” 1972), and Zapp and working-class |
Roger (“More Bounce to the Ounce,” 1980), became the most sampled this context a:
funk groups. Samples from these songs permeate all hip-hop styles, expression of .
from party and novelty rap to Afro-centric and gangsta styles, as rejection of m.
evident in the beats of Public Enemy (“Bring the Noise,” 1988), Geto guitarist and «
Boys (“Mind of a Lunatic,” 1990), Ice Cube (“Jackin’ 4 Beats,” 1991), the need to exz
Digital Underground (“Doowhatchalike,” 1990), Snoop Doggy Dogg vour own pers.
(“Serial Killa,” 1993), Too Short (“Sample the Funk,” 1995), X-Clan tated this proc
(“Xodus,” 1992), and Wu-Tang Clan (“Method Man,” 1993). new technolog:

Funk’s influence on hip-hop is manifested in various other social spaces F
ways. The P-Funk vocabulary inspired an original hip-hop language and celebratec
as well as the use of humor (including cartoon and science fiction
characters) as a strategy for “dropping science” (knowledge), the ACKNOWLED¢
mission of Five Percent rappers. Moreover, funk musicians have ~He ees
collaborated with rappers. Roger worked with 2Pac and Dr. Dre on stitutions
“California Love,” which received a Grammy nomination for Best = allow at the c
Rap Song by a Duo or Group in 1996. Funk pioneers James Brown SeanPeadl, Cals
and George Clinton and P-Funk legend Bootsy Collins appear on 5 oreliminart -
songs and videos of hip-hop artists. Los Angeles producer and rap- a br tne
per Dr. Dre edited the footage of “The Landing of the Mothership” aes and~ Geis
into his own video of “Let Me Ride” (1992).** Both funk and hip-hop <-sys and nee,
created new spaces for African Americans to explore new possi- =-nk Music: -
bilities for both creative and personal expression, which resulted _metican Met-
in an original language, fashions, dances, and cultural styles that epee -
have permeated the whole and redefined the character of American
popular culture. . Bree

CONCLUSIONS >.30x Power 42
Funk is urban at its core, blending industrial-based and technologi- - _ “
cal sounds with song lyrics about the realities of urban Black life. se
Funk is also multidimensional in function and meaning. Created as -
310 African American Music =
qr

--- Page 19 ---
i-nit an urban form of dance or Party music during an era of changing
— social and economic conditions that followed the passage of the
P STI SS 1964 Civil Rights Act, the lyrics of funk reflect both the optimism
ee os. and disillusionment of African Americans in the struggle for racial
cesof equality. Even though the themes of “party” and “hang loose” on the
g Sony dance floor permeate funk, they embody nationalist messages that
ome 9 communicate a revolutionary spirit, an urban attitude of defiance,
ms ren and the call for Black solidarity associated with the Black Power j
—, Movement of the late 1960s and early 1970s.
rou The funk aesthetic embodies the energy, sensibilities, and val-
eae $ ues of the African American working class. This aesthetic, as well
ae as funk’s sociopolitical message, appealed to all Black social class- q
(tet es, including young Black professionals, who frequently migrated
Bliss from their integrated neighborhoods to clubs in African American
= ee working-class communities where funk reigned supreme. Within
—siet this context and that of an “integrated” society, funk became an
icles expression of cultural liberation and musical experimentation—a
28 BS rejection of mainstream values and norms. Funk, contends funk :
met guitarist and vocalist Danny Webster, “is a black thing. There is |
FE the need to express yourself as an African American. You need to be
Ts3e your own person.” In the 1970s and 1980s, funk musicians facili-
ee tated this process by formulating a new Black aesthetic, exploiting
new technologies from an Afrocentric perspective, and creating new
[ez be social spaces (the land of funk) where African Americans affirmed
a ' and celebrated their “blackness.”
--. i ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Q ———..s sss
aan The research for this essay was conducted with the support of various
=i ue institutions and foundations. During my 1999-2000 residency as a
Bowe | Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences,
ae OF i Stanford, California, I completed the final stages of research for
an a preliminary paper on this topic. I am grateful for the financial
a i support by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation and the College of
iver i Arts and Sciences, Indiana University-Bloomington. This essay
oF sm draws and revises some material from another essay by the author, :
de® “Funk Music: An Expression of Black Life in Dayton, Ohio and the
«Tie American Metropolis,” in The American Metropolis: Image and Inspiration
an | (Amsterdam: Vu University Press, 2001).
| KEY TERMS
| = |
Black Power Movement
Crossover
= Disco
ast Funk
poe Be Groove
i
Funk 311
st
