--- Page 1 ---
: (
i
=ns.
I
i
| |
q |
CHAPTER 3 a
Religious Music 7
q 1
Mellonee V. Burnim q
Es |
‘ |
Be
%
The dynamic role that music plays in the worship of Black Americans has *
been well documented. From the vivid descriptions of songs shouted out a
in the invisible church of the Black slave, to the music innovations stan- q
dardized in the newly independent African Methodist Episcopal (A.M.E.) a
congregation founded by Richard Allen, we learn of the repertoire, per- 4
formance practices, and functions of the eighteenth-century genre called 4
the folk spiritual. From twentieth-century accounts by scholars in reli- a
gion such as Mays and Nicholson1 and Drake and Cayton,2 and such 4
respected musicians as the composer John Work III* of Fisk University, ql
we learn of the transference of the musical concepts embodied in the “
spiritual into the modern Black religious context, resulting in the devel- q
opment of gospel music. Gospel music 7
_ Negro spirituals and gospel music are the two indigenous musical _ Religious music 4
genres that have historically dominated the worship of Black Americans — of African q
in the United States. Although music scholars have also documented Americans that 4
the performance of lined hymns and psalms,‘ standard hymns,’ and emerged in 4
songs from the western European classical music literature in Black urban capitals f
religious services, Negro spirituals and gospel music are the religious ann pn =a a
music genres actually created by and for Blacks themselves and which eae nan 4
therefore reflect African American musical genius. century. 4
Negro spirituals were the products of slaves; gospel songs emerged Spiritual 4
during the first quarter of the twentieth century among members of Religious music j
the urban working class—the lower economic and educational strata of African a
of the Black community. Although spirituals and gospel music were Americans q
created well over 100 years apart, contemporary research has shown during slavery. q
51 q
Be _ _ .

--- Page 2 ---
Es_—7"
.
that the two genres function similarly in religion and culture for Black a
Americans.’ The Black composer John Wesley Work IIL argues that gos- | _.
pel music of the 1930s and 1940s was “composed by [emphasis mine]
the same people who formerly created the spiritual, and for [emphasis oo.
mine| the same people who used to worship by the spiritual.”* Te
This discussion of African American religious music presents 4 . ,
chronological history of its development that addresses both similat- ae
ities and distinctions between these two major genres. The meanings a
and interpretations of African American religious music will be dis- _
cussed primarily from the point of view of Black people themselves. ,
The dynamics of culture as a critical determinant of musical expres-
sion will be foregrounded, for to understand African American mu-
sic it is absolutely essential to understand, as deeply as possible, the
culture of its creators—the attitudes, values, and beliefs that shaped
their approaches and responses tO the American context.
Folk spiritual FOLK SPIRITUALS Oe
besa halk The earliest form of Black religious music to develop in the United : ;
a cappella States was what 1s commonly referred to as the folk spiritual. The des- .
religious ignation “folk” is necessary tO distinguish this Jate eighteenth-century .
music created creation from the arranged spiritual or concert version that emerged -
by African following the Civil War. The folk spiritual was an outgrowth of slav- a
Americans ery; it was a uniquely African response to ap institution that engaged . 7
during slavery. ina systematic, though unsuccessful, attack on the cultural legacy of -
Black people in America.
Although the first Africans were brought to the North American
colonies in 1619, well over 100 years passed before a distinct form of —
African American religious music came into existence. Prior to the first oe
Great Awakening, the spiritual revival that swept the colonies begin- .
ning around 1740,’ the numbers of slaves converted to Christianity, = a.
a prerequisite for the birthing of the Negro spiritual, were few. Those _
minimal conversion efforts directed toward the slaves were largely * --
thwarted either by (1) language barriers among the African-born oo.
population, (2) tacit resistance from slaves committed to maintain- a
ing their African religious identity, or (3) opposition from slave own- a
ers who perceived of Christianity and its doctrines of egalitarianism co
as counter to their socioeconomic self interest.° Even though the . i
Church of England had formed the Society for the Propagation of nes
the Gospel in Foreign Parts in 1701 for the purpose of engaging in rs
missionary activity in the British colonies, its efforts yielded rather oo “a
insignificant results among the slave population. _——
In contrast, accounts of Blacks engaged in Christian worship dur- ga |
ing the Great Awakening (1740- 1800) reveal a sizeable Black presence at _—
some worship services, in some cases enough to prompt descriptions Oo: wane
their large numbers and the degree and quality of their participation in a
the frontier worship. According to Dena Epstein, a depiction by White —
52 African American Music —

--- Page 3 ---
|
i
i
|
Methodist minister John Watson in 1819 represents the first written { !
account of the existence of a distinctive form of religious music among 1 '
the slave population. Watson objects to the fact that (1) Blacks were |
known to sing songs of their “own composing” instead of the estab- :
lished repertoire of the Methodist hymnal, (2) these songs were poeti- ‘
| cally substandard, and (3) the music was influencing Whites to engage
, in similar practice. Watson made these comments in his Methodist Error 5 |
3 or Friendly Christian Advice to Those Methodists Who Indulge in Extravagant a
Religious Emotions and Bodily Exercises: q
. We have too a growing evil, in the practice of singing in our places of wor- a q
. ship, merry airs, adapted from old songs, to hymns of our composing, often 4 |
; miserable as poetry and senseless as matter, and most frequently composed q |
and sung by the illiterate Blacks of the society...the evil is only occasionally .
: condemned, and the example has already visibly affected the religious manners j i
3 of some Whites." a q
Although the music Watson refers to is not yet labeled as a q |
“spiritual,” his comments document the existence among Blacks of a |
- well-defined body of repertoire that they themselves had composed. a
3 It is clear that this music stood in distinction from standard White 4 i
S- practice, and that it was pervasive enough and powerful enough to 4 |
4 influence musical practice across the Black-White divide. In her sem- a
cd inal 1977 work Sinful Tunes and Spirituals, Dena Epstein argues that a |
J spirituals likely predated Watson’s reference by several decades." . |
A When introduced to Christianity, African slaves reinterpreted 4
oF their religious instruction through an African cultural lens. From ‘a
a sociocultural perspective, the development of the spiritual can q :
m1 actually be considered as an overt act of resistance to the subjuga- {
of tion imposed by Europeans. Consequently, the Negro folk spiritual ‘ I
st symbolized Black cultural identity and Black religious expression as q
a it evolved on North American soil.® q
aa The spiritual emerged in both the North and South as a genre
se distinctively different from music that characterized European _,
ly American musical traditions of the period. In both regions, the critical ’ | |
ae! factor that allowed Blacks to articulate and advance a unique musical 4 |
“n- identity was that of autonomy. In the South, the invisible church was ;
n- the spawning ground; in the North, it was the independent Black (
sm. church. Whether in the ravine, gully, field, or living quarters, African mm
one American slaves fiercely guarded their privacy, not merely out of fear ;
of of reprisal but out of their collective desire to express themselves in a a
- in way that was uniquely meaningful to them. Although “black codes” 4 |
ner that prohibited the assembly of Blacks outside the presence of Whites { |
were passed as early as the 1630s in Virginia, slaves nonetheless chose q
nate to risk life and limb to engage in autonomous Christian worship."4 4
eat Former slave Fannie Moore recalls: “Never have any church. If you go, q _ 4
sof you set in de back of de white folk’s church. But de niggers slip off f ,
ain and pray and hold prayer-meetin’ in de woods, den dey turn down a 4
‘nite big wash pot and ’member some of de songs we use to sing.” {
Religious Music 53 :

--- Page 4 ---
oes
Testimony from ex-slave Lucretia Alexander shows how Blacks Sea form cic
sometimes merely tolerated White religious leadership, preferring “es ral Abie he 2
instead to conduct worship in their own time and in their own way: Snowe coe eee
frrm. is a strong =
The preacher came....He’d just say, “Serve your masters. Don’t steal your cemoryin the ives -
master’s turkey. Don’t steal your master’s hawgs. Don’t steal your master’s =-2n von Hormps ss:
meat. Do whatsomever your master tells you to do.” Same old thing all the “ls - 7
. -ne field of ethno.
time. My father would have church in dwelling houses, and they had to
whisper....Sometimes they would have church at his house. That would be Scill there is ome 7227
when they would want a real meetin’ with some real preachin’.... They used to African, name. 27
sing their songs in a whisper and pray in a whisper. That was a prayer-meeting alternating With 272
from house to house once or twice—once or twice a week."® European folksor ::
The character of worship among Blacks in autonomous settings Nineteenth-cenz
during slavery was closely related to that of contemporary African Zispse Of the overs.
American worship. There was prayer, communal singing, testifying, tailed account :s :
and sometimes, but not always, preaching. The most striking aspects of Li ted States, the tiv:
the worship were evident in the manner in which these elements were ores the complex:r
expressed. Prayer was described as extemporaneous, typically moving -nequivocally thar z
from speech to song. Congregational participation, in the form of carmony “THEere 2: :
verbal affirmations, was not only accepted but was expected and highly => two appear to fe
valued. Singing involved everyone present and was accompanied by - the spirituals ind:
hand clapping, body movement, and, if the spirit was particularly high, rents as subsetvier: -
shouting and religious dance, both peak forms of expressive behavior. >>nsequence of the
An account by Sarah Fitzpatrick, an Alabama slave, reiterates the sent. Allen notes ::
Call-response desire of Blacks to worship independently of Whites and illustrates cc! keep exquisite 2:
A song the expressive freedom that Blacks often found in doing so: =zunted by any obs:
form which a
characterized Niggers commence to wanna go CO church by de’selves, even ef dey had to meet pee OF snatches
£ in the white church. So white fo’ks have deir service in de mornin’ an’ “Niggers” rae they please.”--
rey have deirs in de evenin; after dey clean up, wash de dishes, an’ look a’ter everth- Early descriptic:
the earliest ing....Ya see “Niggers” lack to shout a hole lot an’ wid de white fo’ks al round :s accompanied on™
documented ’em, dey couldn’t shout jes lack dey want to.” sera ell 7
3 >ercussive vs
spirituals. Also, hip. in which . 4th ' 7 SERMSSIVE GIEEIERE
- ¥ mee
a performance Ecstatic wors ip, in which participants expressed themselves susical instrumen::
practice in through what is often referred to as shouting, was commonplace in ~ziing devices, did =
which a singer or the invisible church. Under the influence of the Holy Spirit, congre- on so highly value
instrumentalist gants could be moved to scream, fall to the ground, run, cry, or dance. ->smer director of -
makes a musical When spirits were particularly high, services sometimes lasted far into >mithsonian Institz
statement which the night, the length being determined only by the collective energy s-veet Honey in the
is answered by that fueled the group."® Those principles that governed the character —ing is to destroy =
another soloist, of the worship also governed the character of the songs sung during - an instrument. I:
inetreneeric the worship. =-nest Brown refers
or group. The oF - . :
group Descriptions of the folk spiritual invariably refer to the call-response “>om nothing” and *
statement . . _.
or leader-chorus structure in which the constant repetition of the re-
and answer “4 The ‘Rine Sh
‘ sponse allows and encourages everyone to participate. At the same ing Snout
sometimes f , chin the call ded by th _. ;
overlap. time, variation within the call-response structure was provided by the ~=e specific type o:
. .t : 5 : a « *
Also called leader or soloist; it was this structural component that supplied the snout, or “running |
antiphony; greatest degree of textual, melodic, and rhythmic interest. In some zznce incorporatec
call-and- instances, the soloist or leader ended the call before the response >ractice of dancing *
response. began; in others the soloist may overlap the group’s response. cn slave converts by
54 African American Music al :
fr 2 gious Music
STO nn eee weer ee
a -— — in
— SE
a i
othe
a : |

--- Page 5 ---
_
_— ‘ \ !
i
—
As a form ubiquitous among the musica] cultures of West and 4 i
Central Africa that supplied slaves to the Americas, the call-response j i
form is a sttong marker of the Petvasiveness of African cultural q |
memory in the lived experiences of New World slaves. Writing in 1926, i
Erich von Hornbostel, a scholar of Aftican music who Ploneered in '
the field of ethnomusicology, wrote: q |
Still there is one feature in American Negro Songs which is not European but q ;
African, namely the form consisting of leading lines sung by a single Voice, q |
alternating with a refrain sung by a chorus. This form, it is true, occurs in a
European folksongs, but in Aftican Songs it is almost the only one used.29 =
%
Nineteenth-cenrury descriptions of folk spirituals Provide a a
glimpse of the overall character of the performance. One Particularly q |
detailed account is included in the introduction to Slave Songs of the q
United States, the first published collection of Negro spirituals, which 4
notes the complexity of the heterophonic vocal texture, establishing , |
unequivocally that the Spirituals were neither sung in unison nor in ; |
; harmony, “There is no singing in Parts as we understand it and yer ' /
i NO CWO appear to be singing the same thing.”20 References to thythm Pe
in the spirituals indicate a characteristic regular pulse and a view of { |,
| texts as subservient to rhythm. Both of these features were the likely 1 |
consequence of the Strong alliance the Senre had with body move- _
ment. Allen notes in the introduction to Slave Songs: “The negroes |
[sic] keep exquisite time in singing and do not suffer themselves to be |
daunted by any obstacle in the words. The Most obstinant Scripture |
Phrases or snatches from hymns they will force to do duty with any | |
tune they please,”2! mm
Early description of Spirituals uniformly document the singing f
as accompanied only by handclaps and footstomps, which provide a i
Petcussive element reminiscent of drumming. Bans on the use ofloud ,
musical instruments, especially drums, which could be used as Sig- mm
naling devices, did not succeed in eliminating the percussive dimen- =
sion so highly valued in Aftican music, As Bernice Johnson Reagon, _
former director of the Program in Black American Culture at the a
Smithsonian Institution and founder of the female a cappella group 1
Sweet Honey in the Rock, states, “The only way you can ban drum- 4
ming is to destroy the drummer, because drumming does not exist a
in an instrument. Te exists within a need...within a human spirit,”22 . ; il
Etnest Brown refers to this cultural resourcefulness as “something Ring shout 4
from nothing” and “more from something,”25 s form Otfiolk q
Spiritual which aa
The Ring Shout incorporates | !)
The specific type of folk spiritual variously known as a shout, ring aoe q
Shout, or “running spirchil”*4 js so called because of the element of as participants 1 |
dance Incorporated into its performance. As one might imagine, the move in a | _ |
| Practice of dancing while singing religious SOngS Was not introduced to counterclockwise q /
the slave converts by White Missionaries, In fact, dancing was abhorred circle. ; i
a
\
Religious Music 55 |
ER —

--- Page 6 ---
by members of the Black and White Christian establishment and la- Tog =
beled as everything from “profane” to “heathenish.” Because dance had is Sy
been such an integral part of cultural expression among Blacks in their =eized
West and Central African homelands, missionaries failed abysmally in Sontieg Weng
their efforts to eradicate this practice in the United States. ioe _
Describing observations of Blacks performing spirituals in the soak a _.
Port Royal Sea Islands, Allen, Ware, and Garrison note, “Song and mis es i
dance are alike extremely energetic, and often, the shout lasts into the rt oners-
middle of the night, the monotonous thud, thud of the feet prevents ribs cae x
sleep within a half mile of the praise house.”’ In the minds of those Bagaeven a o
engaged in the ritual behavior, their stylized movement was not to be it: wines -
confused with dance as expressed in secular contexts. “Dancing in the ~aeerace _.
usual way is regarded with great horror by the people of Port Royal, ee .
but they enter with infinite zest into movements of the ‘shout.”””° The -- a ..
compilers of Slave Songs are careful to clarify that any tune could be 37h ——_
converted into a shout,” inferring that all shouts were spirituals, but =, sing “=Ey
not all spirituals were shouts. It is the inclusion of the element of a Be age
dance, as members of the group move in a counterclockwise circle, —— wanes
that distinguished the shout.”® om connes
Other elements observers detailed concerning the shout include ---2e
(1) a high degree of repetition; (2) the continuation of the songs for ee -.
indefinite, but sometimes lengthy, periods; (3) variation of tempo in 2 ng cee bs
different contexts; (4) robust timbre; and (S) highly embellished me- oe goa we 7
lodic lines, with an abundance of “slides from one note to another ee “aa
and turns and cadences not in articulated notes.”” A comparison i: ee =
of these features with those evident in recordings of shouts from crit hone,
the Georgia Sea Islands in the 1960s reveals these practices as still crtes Sige
evident. Moreover, recordings also clearly establish a polyrhythmic ooo ein
foundation (another defining principle of West and Central African gus keen
musics) undergirding the songs.” qaek .
Shouts in the North - - . =
The establishment of the independent African Methodist Episcopal aes a
(A.M.E.) congregation under the leadership of Richard Allen set the ee -
stage for the autonomy that fostered the growth of the spiritual in Aya ara a
the North. After separating from the White Methodist parent church mt memes -
in Philadelphia in 1787, Allen made a conscious choice to reject its a
domination and at the same time embrace its doctrines. Allen was oo
quite satisfied with the “plain and simple gospel” of the Methodist ae pass
church, which, in his view, well suited his congregation because it ind 4
was one that “the unlearned can understand and the learned are sure ee
to understand.”* Allen’s selective identification with Methodism oo
was further evident in his decision to reject the standard Methodist 18. I.
hymnal, choosing instead to compile his own, which included songs SESE
he felt had greater appeal for Blacks. im aes
56 African American Music fo ame. ys
TT
1
" _
i" x
7 al

--- Page 7 ---
i
|
|
i.
“a. The research of Portia K. Maultsby, Eileen Southern, William
ad Tallmadge, and J. R. Braithwaite details the innovations that charac-
air terized the songs in Allen’s hymnal.” Texts were simplified, and re-
in frain lines and choruses were routinely added. Southern suggests that { 1
Allen quite likely wrote some of the texts for his 1801 hymnal (the q
Se book contained no music); for tunes, he probably composed some i
ad himself and used popular songs of the day as well. Allen’s goal was /
ye fO generate congregational participation and assure freedom of wor- j |
ats ship for his members.*+ Non-Black observers of Allen’s worship were ,
=e frequently struck by the high level of congregational involvement in |
he spirited singing. Not surprisingly, such early commentators did not ’ |
Does hesitate to register their displeasure at the A.M.E, song style. j |
-al, Musicologist Eileen Southern speculates that John Watson’s 1819
“he comments on the undesirable practices of Blacks in Methodism actu- 4 ,
ye ally referred to Richard Allen’s church, the “dominant Black Methodists =
Et in the Philadelphia conference at the time.”35 Watson indicates that 4
of Mr. Wesley, Methodist church founder, was equally displeased with those q
cle, who chose to reject the standard Methodist hymnal for questionable a
substitutes. Watson notes that Wesley actually went as far as expelling =
-de three ministers “for singing ‘poor, bald, flat, disjointed hymns and...singing q
for the same verse over and over again with all their might 30 or 40 times, to q
+ the utter discredit of all sober christianity [sic].”> Watson’s critique docu- 4
~e- ments the existence of musical values and Practices among Blacks in the 4
mar North that are consonant with those associated with Blacks in the South. q |
get In Negro Slave Songs in the United States ( 1953), Miles Mark Fisher confirms ma
om that during the antebellum period “often Negroes were not permitted to 4
till enter Methodist church buildings at all since they disturbed quiet and |
ic dignified worship by beating out the rhythm of songs with feet patting 4
zan and hands clapping in place of African instruments,”3” .
Both the song texts and the aesthetic principles that affirmed {
musical and textual repetition—handclaps, footstomps, and body 1 |
movement—clearly met with great disapproval from the White a
-pal Methodist establishment. It was especially disconcerting that Blacks q
die were known to use secular melodies in composing sacred songs. But _
“in Watson was even more annoyed with the Blacks in the church who j |
itch incorporated elements of dance in their songs: q
> its Here ought to be considered too a most exceptionable error, which has the ;
was tolerance at least of the rulers of our camp meetings. In the blacks’ quarter, the 4
fist coloured people get together, and sing for hours together, short scraps of dis- %
. jointed affirmations, pledges, or prayers, lengthened out with long repetition 4
an choruses. These are all sung in the merry chorus-manner of the southern harvest 7
sure field, or husking-frolic method, of the slave blacks.... With every word so sung, 4
“sm they have a sinking of one or other leg of the body alternately; producing an au- 4
dist dible sound of the feet at every step, and as manifest as the steps of actual negro 5
sags dancing in Virginia, Bec. If some, in the meantime sit, they strike the sounds q
alternately on each thigh. What in the name of religion, can countenance or :;
tolerate such gross perversions of true religion!>8 q
4
Religious Music 57
NT

--- Page 8 ---
The practices that governed performance by these renegade Wentworth Higs
Methodists were virtually identical to those of the folk spiritual or of a Black Arm:
ring shout documented in Slave Songs. shouters in cam:

Watson’s attitude toward the folk spiritual was echoed by and stagger,” Ker.
Daniel Alexander Payne, nineteenth-century African American mini- “steadily circline
ster, historian, and bishop of the A.M.E. church. People in the local group members -
churches viewed the shout as the essence of religion; rings were not with applause.>
frivilous or tangential to the Christian experience, and they were Slave accour.
considered necessary for conversion. Bishop Payne likened the ring them as original
shout ritual to a “bush meeting”; the songs he called “cornfield tive process, noti:
ditties,” and he referred to the participants as “ignorant but well

id _ ae For all the song:
meaning.” His efforts to make the bands “disgusting” and to teach constantly imz=-
the “right, fit and proper way of serving God” were, for all practical facts of to-dav's-
purposes, an abysmal failure among the masses of his congregants.” gloom, and the s
The following account of one of Payne’s confrontations with this “We're gwine to 3.
ritual is an illustration: De bell done i+:

- Gwine to de lars:

After the sermon they formed a ring, and with coats off sung, clapped their De bell done:

hands and stamped their feet in a most ridiculous and heathenish way. Trust, believer. .

I requested the pastor to go and stop their dancing. At his request they stopped De bell Zone jolie:

their dancing and clapping of hands, but remained singing and rocking their .

bodies to and fro. This they did for about fifteen minutes. I then went, and and so on inde2=

taking their leader by the arm requested him to desist and to sit down and Eien ,
sing in a rational manner. J told him also that it was a heathenish way to : Igginson's >
worship and disgraceful to themselves, the race, and the Christian name. In McKim, who in ¢:
that instance they broke up their ring but would nor sit down, and walked al and got this re:
sullenly away. After the sermon in the afternoon, having another opportunity further that if sox
of speaking alone to this young leader of the singing and clapping ring, he said: s] ~
Ellon aaa veraeste wesreerwuee eee Mranaad whos delle ak slaves] sang about

Sinners won't get converted unless there is a ring.” Said I, “You mighe sing i

till you fell down dead, and you would fail to convert a single sinner, because che craft and skit)

nothing but the Spirit of God and the word of God can convert sinners.” He very good singers 5
replied: “The Spirit of God works upon people in different ways. At camp- Snow, till they ger:
meeting there must bea ring here, a ring there, a ring over yonder, or sinners Th eo"

a s ~ . v0 he collection .

will not get converted.” This was his idea, and it is also that of many others. eg
ror its documentaz:
Payne’s view of appropriate music and behavior in worship was several of which *
clearly aligned with those of Watson and other White Methodists. ‘vords, the Slave S-
Those Blacks most likely to agree with his perspective were, in his repertoire of the rx:
view, ones with some degree of education. Unquestionably, a percep- “Ato contemporary
tual rift between the folk and the educated elite was emerging. number one in the
Various authors have pinpointed the existence of the ring shout zl the songs cited. :
in the southern states of South Carolina, North Carolina, Texas, *{cKim.*” Other tix’
Louisiana, Virginia, and Georgia."' Most writers also designate cae standard reper:
the shout as exclusive to the Baptist denomination. But as Eileen “fe,” “Michael Row:
Southern points out, the shout belonged to “no one denomination Valley,” “Nobody K-
or region. It simply represented the sutvival of an African tradition in The Old Ship of Z:
the New World.” Variations of the shout have been noted, suchas the Careful review c
“drama shout,” in which a person in the center lowers the body inch =imeteenth-century
by inch first to the knees, then down until the head touches the floor. cheir twentieth-cenz:
Afterward, the shouter slowly rises inch by inch.* Colonel Thomas :xample, reflects ne:
58 African American Music “2 gious Music
;
“tl i
a “_
eee ,

--- Page 9 ---
Wentworth Higginson, in the diary of his experiences as commander
of a Black Army regiment during the Civil War, recalls observing ' |
shouters in camp who would “heel and toe fumultuously, ” “tremble r
and stagger,” “stoop and rise” “whirl,” and “caper sideways,” al] while 1 |
“steadily circling like dervishes,” Higginson further establishes thar j
Soup members were known to acknowledge Special “strokes of skill” z |
With applause. a
Slave accounts of the Origin of the SPirituals consistently credit a
them as Original or divinely inspired, Higginson documents this crea- 4
tive Process, Noting that:
For all the songs, but especially for their own wild hymns [read Spirituals] they 4 |
constantly improvised simple verses, with the same odd Mingling. —the little 4 i
facts of to-day’s [sic] march being Interwoven with the depths of theological 1 1
gloom, and the same jubilant chorus annexed to all: th us,— 4 i
“We re &Wine to de Ferry, | a
De bell done ringing: il
Gwine to de landing, ; |
De bell done ringin Lg: 4
Trust, believer, q !
De bell done ringing.” d |
and so on indefinicely. 4
f ;
: Higginson’s findings are consistent with those of J. Miller ; il
McKim, who in 1862 asked a Slave about the Origins of the Spiritu- { i
al and got this response: “Dey make ‘em sah.” The slave explained q
further chat if something of note occurred during the day, they [the q i
Slaves] Sang about it that night at the “praise Meeting,” Recognizing q 1
the craft and skill involved in this process, the Slave asserts: “Somes 4 |
very 00d singers and know how and dey work it in—work it in, you F ji
know, til] they get it tight, and dat’s de way,”4 a
The collection Slave Songs of the United States is Particularly valuable im
for its documentation of 136 Songs collected from slaves themselves, q |
Several of which have ‘wentieth-century correspondences, [pn other 4 ;
words, the Slave Songs collection establishes the fact that religious j |
Fepertoire of the nineteenth century has been Selectively translated mm
into contemporary usage. One such example is “Rol] Jordan Roll,” a |
number one in the Collection: it js described as the most Popular of 7 ]
all the SOngs cited, having been Previously Published in 1862 by Lucy i
McKim.” Other titles from the collection that have become a Part of 7
the standard Tepertoire of Spirituals include: “No Man Can Hinder i
| Me,” “Michael Row the Boat Ashore,” “Wr Will Walk Through the a.
| Valley,” “Nobody Knows the Trouble I’ve Had,” “Jacob’s Ladder,” and a
“The Old Ship of Zion.” _ |
Careful review of these Seemingly familiar Songs reveals that the ‘
nineteenth-century versions are frequently radically different from ’ l
their ‘wentieth-century counterparts, “Rol] Jordan Roll” of 1867, for 7 |
example, reflects neither the Melody nor the text as commonly cited @ |
a ;
4 q
Religious Music 59 q
ee

--- Page 10 ---
in present-day collections or heard on recordings. Slave Songs “Roll Chorus: Omy L:
Jordan Roll” begins with the verse: O Daniz
Omy Le
My brudder sittin’ on the tree of life wi heme
An’ he yearde when Jordan Roll gp
Roll Jordan Roll, Jordan Roll, Jordan Roll. Yet a third exa
; ; oe , ; indictm |
In contrast, in 1909 the Fisk University Jubilee Singers recorded beat; Brat i hg
' ; ; ae ' eatin
a radically different version of the same spirititual, which begins with gs and food r
the chorus rather than the verse. This latter version is representative No more peck o’ core:
of current practice: Bie Mane
No more peck 0’ cory:
Chorus 2x: Roll Jordan Roll, Roll Jordan Roll Many thousand go. |
I want to go to heaven when I die.
To hear Jordan Roll. Subsequent ver:
mistress’ »
Verse: O sister you ought to been there call. ;
Yes, my Lord. The Negro spir
A sitting in the kingdom textured mosaic of |
To hear Jordan Roll. cultural values. To.
In similar fashion, the spiritual “Nobody Knows the Trouble via and collectis
Pve Had” is now generally known as “Nobody Knows the Trouble ew World. To pers
T've Seen.” The verse “I pick de berry and I suck de juice,” which is in- enrendte or not—th,
cluded in the 1867 collection, has not been retained in modern usage. understood only by
The biblical basis of the spiritual is confirmed in the Slave oro SySCEMaCie Wal
Songs compilation, with references to Old Testament characters of bondage. To sing
from Daniel to Moses to Joshua, all of whom overcame seemingly THE ARRA
insurmountable odds, just as the slaves sought to do in their strug: ANCGED S!
gle against human bondage. Viewed as a whole, the 1867 collec- The next form of :
tion reflects a concept of God as personal and integral to everyday Blacks on USS. soil «
life. God was neither distant not abstract, and, contrary to popular the Fisk Jubilee Sir
thought, neither were slave song texts concerned exclusively, or even spiritual was know:
primarily, with concerns of the afterlife. “No Man Can Hinder Me” With the formatior
includes the following text:
Walk in kind Savior a
No man can binder me. e
Walk in sweet Jesus Pi
on
No man can hinder me.... ay
; 3 ah a. em
The recurring response, although embedded in the language of ‘ee
Christianity, is a forthright statement of the individual and collective  £ Vn
power to conquer whomever poses a threat to one’s sense of well 7
being. Similarly, the 1867 version of “O Daniel” castigates the super- met aes ’
ficial Christian as a prelude to affirming God’s ability to deliver Pe : o~,
Daniel from the lions and raising the possibility of deliverance for i
the slave as well: at |
Verse: You call yourselfa church member a as _—
You hold your head so high 7 ‘kg "
You praise God with your glitt’ring tongue i Bs Ye,
But you leave all your heart behind. ae Ab 4 Gear pans ,
6 tes Pye. : Lébs x
60 African American Music Religious Music
sil . PT SET
al
In

--- Page 11 ---
|
st Chorus: O my Lord delivered Daniel
“— O Daniel, O Daniel,
O my Lord delivered Daniel, |
why not deliver me too?
Yet a third example, “Many Thousand Go,” reveals a Piercing
indictment of the brutality of slavery, anticipating the time when
saad beatings and food rationing will be a thing of the Past:
vith
a No more peck 0’ corn for me
eo be No more, no more
No more peck 0° corn for me
Many thousand 0.
Subsequent verses Proclaim “no more driver’s lash” and “no more
mistress’ call,”
The Negro Spiritual as it was originally conceived was a richly
textured mosaic of Christian belief intertwined with African-derived
cultural values, To perform the spiritual was to perform one’s indi-
; vidual and collective identity as a Person of African descent in the
cole New World. To perform the spirituals, whether they exhibited double
ee le entendre or not—-that is, whether they conveyed subliminal messages
A at understood only by the initiated, or members of the group—was to
ae wage systematic warfare on the insticutiton that imposed the chains
re of bondage. To sing the spiritual was to be free.
Ters '
ngly THE ARRANGED SPIRITUAL
Tug: 7 .
"ae The next form of religious musical expression to develop among
-day Blacks on U.S. soil was the arranged spiritual. Prior to the efforts of
te the Fisk Jubilee Singers (Figure 3.1) beginning in 1871, the Negro
seer spiritual was known and respected almost exclusively by Blacks.#8
\fe? With the formation of this group, however, the Spiritual assumed
: 4 ; Figure 3.1
gs | jij, Portrait of the Fisk ‘
WS a se /f > Jubilee Singers,
i eZ i FS , | ca. 1871. Left to q
a EA \. j i. hE cdl ei sa - a right: Minnie Tate, i
: ay ae aa & <a a if Green Evans, q
2 of be. “3 Pra A ys aS oe - ia, Issac Dickerson, j
“rive a ee a. yy aN eters, Fay. , rr? bg} Jennie Jackson,
~ i “os “, — er anid a fs ‘ 74 Ye 5 yihoe Maggie Porter, ’
ve Bac «a, pee ad ” , PZ Ella Sheppard, 4
Der- s Ly ae ms ; pn ENS < wd Cah’ ; ps =f of Fs Thomas Rutling, §
"et ‘a oY | L < e Seg “Pra fo ’ Ca fiw Benjamin M. 4
for i, ae a aid ace | Py Fs, oe Pee flolmes, Eliza Walker. i
SA 4 EP tas Beis Bg SF (hk Photographs and Prints d
were. s 4 OS = Ea ee we Be q
{ - , B a P ; AA rs rs i Megs Division, Schomburg 4
ae re i . al | oa H = Center for Research i
‘ioe é cm Bie 2.0 oe = - in Black Culture, The
Pe eggagelas. pei Caras, fe gh oa a k Public Lib 4
PO ge potinag Batis, wee by, Bhhbard ©, Cbwahedas <= ~=—New York Public Lj rary, 7
wie 5 5 Meer Girad, oon: a ifetin ee “Mt ae idtlnaa *@ = Astor, Lenox, and 4
ey feyg. if a an a , y ; Tilden Foundations. 3
alae RE a. al fe CC apiay Sy fat he fh. Im Riles, WEF e Se ay Dy By q
Religious Music 61 —
- _.
oe ii
me ne _—
a r
iif i th Als
q rh
-_ fl!
4 fan Ht iH
a a

--- Page 12 ---
a character and purpose that in many ways differed radically from soy chose a
its folk antecedent. The original group of 11 men and women, most read white] -
ex-slaves and one member only 14 years old,® was established under . .
the leadership of George White, the White university treasurer who University anc
viewed musical concerts as a viable way of raising much-needed funds Early record:=
for the fledgling institution. of four men. -
Embarking on a tour designed to follow the route of the singing, and <
Underground Railroad from Ohio through Pennsylvannia and up the within larger -
Eastern Seaboard to New Jersey, Massachussetts, Washington, Maine, serve as the z
New Hampshire, Vermont, Conneticut, and New York, White’s int- western Euro-
tial vision was to sing for audiences comprised largely of members spiritual form -
of the American Missionary Association, the organization that had performing ch
founded Fisk and multiple other schools for newly freed slaves in the European idez.
aftermath of the Civil War. White launched the singing tours without harmonic paz:
the full blessing of the school administration, for never before had music origina.
there been a similar undertaking. The prevailing image of the Black be repeated fo:
performer was that of the blackfaced minstrel, not of the serious mu- the arranged s-
sician with a repertoire of patriotic songs, spirituals, and other popu- The Fisk
lar musics that bore little resemblance to the stereotypes of Blacks the formatio-
that had graced the stages of America’s public since the advent of with Hampto-
minstrelsy in 1843. in 1872.%* This
Originally known as the “Colored Christian Singers,” White ize the best ir
eventually chose the name Jubilee Singers “after the Old Testament Black compos:
‘year of the jubilee’—a favorite figure of speech into which the slaves for performa-
put their prayers and hopes for emancipation.”™ After a rather dis- John Work II ~
appointing beginning, the Jubilee Singers earned $20,000 in the first Dawson (1895
three months of the tour. By the end of the campaign in 1878, the Smith Moore
Jubilee Singers had raised $150,000, enough to erect Jubilee Hall on component of
the Fisk campus. Their audiences had expanded beyond the United and Universitiz
States to the crown heads of Europe.” have been emb-
The folk spiritual created as an expression of African American mances, arrange.
culture and religion was now transferred to the concert stage. This and Europe ay
change in function was accompanied by a change in performance nals of the Ur::
practices. According to Black composer and Fisk professor John Churches, amo:
Work Il:
Harry T. Burleig:
Mr. White decided on a style of singing the spiritual which eliminated every In 1916, Harry
element that detracted from the pure emotion of the song....Finish, preci- ‘
sion and sincerity were demanded by this leader. While the program featured PSESGLh Ue! Sas:
Spiricuals, variety was given it by the use of numbers of classical standard. a pool of 49 ca:
Mr. White strove for an art presentation.” Episcopal Chu>-.
; ; continual need =
The hand clapping, foot stomping, and individual Jatitude in a
interpreting the melodic line that characterized. the folk spiritual Songs of the U.S.
were replaced by predictability, controlled reserve, and the absence of thie Heat ents axe
overt demonstrative behavior. The aesthetic values that characterized repertoire. Disc:
George White’s own musical culture were now being superimposed piano accompa
onto the Negro spiritual. As Louis Silveri argues, “Singing spirituals ally identical aes
62 African American Music Relietaus hhusle
Ee, —_____________-—========mmmeenneemmmmme mn
Pies
id
i
>

--- Page 13 ---
!
-1 the field was one thing, singing them to sophisticated audiences ? |
tead white] was something else.” | |
University and College Groups |
Early recordings (1909-1911) of the Fisk University quartet, a group |
of four men, document the continuing presence of a cappella, syllabic |
singing, and call-response, although the latter was typically embedded
within larger compositional forms. The melodies of the folk spiritual i
serve as the point of departure for the arrangements grounded in |
western European compositional technique. The dialect of the earlier j
spiritual form remains constant. However, the vocal quality of the singers q |
performing these choral arrangements is generally more reflective of 4 il
European ideals of timbre. Heterophony is replaced with clearly defined 4
harmonic parts, and the element of dance is eliminated altogether. Asa |
music originally transmitted via the oral tradition, folk spirituals could | 4
be repeated for indefinite periods of time; in contrast, performances of .
the arranged spiritual are bound by the dictates of the printed score. J |
The Fisk campaign was an overwhelming success, generating a 1
the formation of similar Stoups at other Black colleges, beginning 4 |
with Hampton and the Fairfield Normal Institute in South Carolina q
in 1872.4 This atranged spiritual tradition has come to symbol- Arranged/ 3 /
ize the best in the Black college choir tradition, with generations of concert Spiritual 4 |
Black composers who established careers developing folk melodies The Post-Civil 4 i
for performance on the concert stage. Notable among many are War form of
John Work Il (1873-1925) and John Work II (1901-1967), William _spirituals, which q |
Dawson (1899-1990), R. Nathaniel Dett (1882-1943), and Undine evolved in q |
Smith Moore (1904-1989). Negro spirituals continue to be a vital Schools created q
. . . to educate a
component of the repertoire of choirs at Historically Black Colleges emancipated a iI
and Universities (HBCUs). As an unparalled American art form, they laws q
have been embraced in transcultural and global contexts, with perfor- 4
Mances, arrangements, and recordings from the continents of Aftica : |
and Europe and their inclusion in standard and supplemental hym- _
nals of the United Methodist, Episcopalian, Lutheran, and Catholic i
Churches, among others.°5 q
Harry T. Burleigh 4 !
In 1916, Harry T, Burleigh (1866-1949: Figure 3.2) became the first 4 |
person to arrange the Negro Spiritual for solo voice. Chosen from q |
a pool of 49 candidates for the position of soloist for St. George’s q !
Episcopal Church in New York City in 1894, Burleigh experienced a q
continual need and desire to present new and fresh musical literature q /
to the congregation that he served for 52 years. Burleigh’s 1916 Jubilee 4
Songs of the U. S. included his “Deep River,” the most well known of i |
his first solo atrangements, which has become a standard part of the ‘
repertoire. Distinguished from the choral arrangement by its use of ‘ |
Piano accompaniment, the solo arrangement otherwise shares virtu- 4
ally identical aesthetic values with its choral counterpart. 4 7
4 |
Religious Music 63 :
" i ff
ii
sill
ne lil

--- Page 14 ---
first African Am
Figure 3.2 is also well kno
Portrait of Harry T. Z ons a Ps and political ir
Burleigh, Mishkin Se ; p Cc In
Studio, New ay 1930s. Repeatec
York, May 1916. . ~~ Constitution H.
Photographs and — a ful. Policies insr:
rints Division, i tw 2.
Schomburg Center io a. eg = (DAR), the bods:
for Research in Black - a , 3 Fd performing the:
Culture, The New York saa - of a national co:
Public Library, Astor, . hata R Its with
Lenox, and Tilden ——— Ooseve bs with
Foundations. _ a substitute cor
nil on Easter Sundz
, with high-level
a occasion, Ande:
i COT and an entire se
— * Paes ee Trouble I’ve See:
om The person
a a entirely of Neg:
9 Fe Robeson (1898-
Pa Kappa graduate
*; a in 1923, Robese:
J oe All-American fo<
a to excel as an ac:
* Po . .
a lar for his role ::
ei Ec ne one te ane al through which >
~ As a perforr:
Harry T. Burleigh is credited with starting the practice of closing several ways. Alt:
recitals with a group of spirituals. The tradition has been sustained by in the performe:
other pioneering Black vocalists such as Roland Hayes (1887-1976), ern European ¢.
one of the world’s leading concert tenors from the 1920s to the cane a reflection of >:
and who at one time was a member of the Fisk Jubilee Singers; other before or
and Marian Anderson (1902-1993, Figure 3.3), who in 1955 was the political ideolog:.
Robeson’s rend:
. : aa | transformations
Figure 3.3 . : ; “« 5 end
Marian Anderson \ 4 ' as “darkies,” wer:
and Franz Rupp, i 7H a a old man called <>
ae ws _ haat s Contrasting’
Photo by 7 : Se . < iri -
John G. Ross; a | spiritual, Robese
Marian Anderson he oppression in the
Collection, Rare Book : . a ; House Un-Amer:
and Manuscript “ed ; ,% consequenceot-
Library, University of . ti . ew OLD 4 a
Pennsylvania. | ee eh) was eventually re
es ie was ostracized >
Seen him. During the
“a4 iP + aa churches became
wy a 4 ewe ing Paul Robesoi: :
Religious Music
64 African American Music 2

--- Page 15 ---
i
first African American to sing at the Metropolitan Opera. Anderson |
is also well known for her historic public encounter with the social |
and political injustice that plagued American society during the |
1930s. Repeated efforts to book a concert for Marian Anderson in |
Constitution Hall in the nation’s capital in 1939 were unsuccess-
ful. Policies instituted by the Daughters of the American Revolution |
(DAR), the body that governed use of the hall, prohibited Blacks from q
performing there. Anderson was unwittingly thrust into the center } |
of a national controversy, which culminated with First Lady Eleanor |
Roosevelt’s withdrawal of her membership from DAR and support of
a substitute concert for Marian Anderson at the Lincoln Memorial i.
on Easter Sunday of the same year. A crowd of over 75,000 attended, 1
with high-level dignitaries strategically seated for visibility. On that '}
occasion, Anderson’s repertoire included “America,” “Ave Maria,” |
and an entire set of Negro spirituals, of which “Nobody Knows the /
Trouble I’ve Seen” was an encore.5” |
The person credited as the first to sing a concert comprised |
entirely of Negro spirituals is the renowned bass-baritione Paul |
Robeson (1898-1976). With a stellar academic career as a Phi Beta ' i
Kappa graduate of Rutgers and Columbia Law School valedictorian { }
in 1923, Robeson was equally gifted as an athlete, being named as an
All-American football player at Rutgers. His career trajectory led him |
to excel as an actor on stage and in film, becoming noted in particu- |
lar for his role in Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein’s Showboat, ' |
through which he made the song “Old Man River” famous.°* 4 |
As a performer of spirituals, Robeson’s profile is distinguished in : |
= several ways. Although most African American artists who pioneered ;
v in the performance of the spiritual held extensive training in west- |
. ern European classical music, Robeson’s singing ability was largely q
5 a reflection of his natural talent. Secondly, Robeson, more than any ;
- other before or after him, centered his performance of spirituals in a
ie political ideology that challenged oppression worldwide. For example, =
Robeson’s rendition of “Old Man River” underwent several textual
transformations over time. The opening lyrics, which referred to Blacks iq
as “darkies,” were modified to reflect a spirit of resistance: “There’s an 4
old man called the Mississippi, That’s the ol’ man I don’t like to be»? ; )
Contrasting with most celebrated performers of the solo-arranged 4
spiritual, Robeson was known as an outspoken critic of racism and 7
Oppression in the United States, making him an eventual target of the q
House Un-American Activities Committee during the late 1940s. As a E
consequence of his encounter with the committee, Robeson’s Passport I
was eventually revoked for eight years by the State Department, and he 3
was ostracized by the White American public that had formerly revered j
him. During the height of his political infamy, African American 4
churches became the mainstay of his concert appearances.” His record- %
ing Paul Robeson in Live Performance (1971) includes spirituals performed q
Religious Music 65 °
a
ae"

--- Page 16 ---
at Mother [A.M.E.] Zion Church in New York City in 1958, after his Avs:
passport was returned and his concert career had been reestablished. Sas
Robeson commented at that event, “...As I have said many times, any Homa. ::
struggles I have been engaged in, whatever I do, it’s been that my grand- ee
nephews and my grandchildren—that your children—somewhere—we ag ince
all, of all races, all creeds can walk this American earth in unity.”*! —
The solo arranged spiritual holds a place of pride and promi- ;
nence in contemporary African American worship, particularly in " Bat -
congregations with significant numbers of members who are college mol SE EE
educated. Its legacy continues as an integral part of the repertoire of HHO. Wes
such renowned African American operatic singers as Camilla Williams SURE. oS.
(Anderson’s protégé), the first African American to hold an extended con- OS ce
tract with a professional opera company in the United States; Leontyne seiermenae
Price; Jessye Norman; and Kathleen Bartle, the latter two of whom fea- simultane =
tured spirituals in their 1990 PBS telecast from Carnegie Hall. nw Ee
TF meh LEC eae
TRANSITIONAL GOSPEL MUSIC serpary oc:
a wi SC POS TT
By the time gospel music started its slow but steady climb to acceptance
and widespread popularity in the 1930s, the folk spiritual had been Tindley Styi
in existence for well over 100 years. The advent of gospel music was tT Te
precipitated by the Great Migration of Blacks seeking a better way of cospel mus:
life from rural to urban contexts during the years surrounding World wales rea
Wars I and II.” The natural predisposition of the migrants to continue sad bee~
familiar ways of being was evident in virtually every aspect of their new sepa!
life in the city, ranging from patterns of dress and food preferences gauss oe -
to musical performance and worship styles. Arna Bontemps and Jack ie a rpawaelag
Conroy describe these migrants: “Though they had been glad to escape <cown to 2
from oppression, nostalgia for the more pleasant associations of the enaine a2
homeland assailed the exiles. Homesick for familiar speech, faces and ed the ye
scenes, they banded themselves together.”™ sspemiel ee -—
In some cases, congregations moved en masse from the South mses press.
to new urban contexts. Upon arriving in Chicago from Harrisburg, halle a Svesgiss
Mississippi, Reverend R. H. Harmon was interviewed by the Chicago che spiritun
Defender; his comments reflect both the collective spirit that under- =o singed iy
girded this migratory shift as well as the promise that the North held ‘edt 2 a
for these new residents: Lae &
Tam working at my trade. I have saved enough to bring my wife and four SMILE AE 3
children and some of my congregation [twenty-eight members]. We are here for ee 3. Se
keeps. They say we are fools to leave the warm country, and how out people are Storm is Ft
dying in the East. Well, I for one am glad that they had the privilege of dying a a
natural death there. That is much better than the rope and torch. I will take my ; oe : - —
chance with the Northern winter.*! SOE Sey Raion
Documenting the process of musical transformation that took neg Bytes
place in southern urban churches during this transitional period, sivicus’ -e:-
John Work IH writes: eg * gree gee
66 African American Music Be pe eel as

--- Page 17 ---
i
E | ;
- his A visitor to southern Negro folk churches will hear much interesting music.
ned. Some of the music will be from the traditional hymnody. Occasionally, tradi-
any tional spirituals will be heard....But he will hear also some exciting new music, : |
which possibly will disturb him....Most notable of course are the instruments |
and- which are being added to the singing today. The accompaniments are just ‘
—we as integral a part of the performance as is the singing and ina like manner, ;
equally an expression of the folk.®
omi- : i
in What made this new music potentially both exciting and disturb- |
; ing at the same time was its radical challenge to the religious status
oe quo, what Michael Harris refers to as the traditional, or “old line,” /
ss church establishment.® During the period from 1900 to 1930, three
~ forms of what I refer to as transitional gospel music—musics which Transitional i
continued to reflect prevailing characteristics of the folk spiritual, yet gospel music ] i
es simultaneously demonstrated new and distinctive features—emerged: Forms of African |
Fear (1) the gospel hymn style pioneered by Charles Albert Tindley in American |
Philadelphia, (2) the rural gospel style that served as a sacred coun- religious EEE ,
terpart of the rural blues, and (3) the Holiness-Pentecostal style that whichasprencite
—— first rose to prominence in the Church of God In Christ. the bridge |
ence between the |
>een Tindley Style spiritual ent
its twentieth
was The man widely regarded by African Americans as the grandfather of century
uv of gospel music, Charles Albert Tindley (1851-1933), was the charismatic counterpart
‘orld minister of Tindley Temple Methodist Churchin Philadelphia. Tindley of traditional |
cmue had been influenced by the doctrines of the holiness movement, a gospel music. : |
new post-Civil War interdenominational collective led by Methodists who ‘ |
ces sought, in part, to reinvigorate religious worship. In keeping with ; |
Jack holiness-inspired values, some of the services at Tindley Temple were /
cape known to continue all night long, filled with spirited congregational 4
= the singing and extemporaneous prayer, features that had also character- q :
cand ized the worship of slaves. As a devout Methodist, Tindley’s church 4
repertoire included hymns and anthems of European origin. Most 7 |
math importantly for the development of gospel music, however, Tindley j |
“urg, himself wrote songs designed to complement his sermons.” Whereas 4
+d go the spiritual as originally conceived was communally created, having 4
~der- no single identifiable composer, the emerging gospel genre was trans- 4
“eld lated, in part, through the written score. 7 |
The first of Tindley’s compositions was published in 1901. a }
Among his total output of 46 songs are his enduring compositions 3
-2 for “We Will Understand It Better By and By,” “Stand by Me,” and “The 4
pare Storm Is Passing Over.”*’ Considered representative of the genre 4
age widely referred to as the gospel hymn, Tindley’s compositions are 4q
sey largely distinguished from the folk spiritual by the use of instrumen- q
tal accompaniment (piano and organ) and prevalence of the verse- |
rook chorus external structure. These compositions maintain a link to the q
riod, spiritual tradition by successfully incorporating call-response into q :
this larger structure. 3
eI
Religious Music 67 3
ne I
iM —

--- Page 18 ---
—_—
Tindley further contributes to the evolution of a unique gospel
style, as Horace Boyer describes, “allowing space in his melodic line
for the interpolation of the so-called blue thirds and sevenths...and
for the inevitable improvisation of text, melody, harmony and rhythm, €e
so characteristic of Black American folk and popular music.” In other = OR
words, as is characteristic of gospel music in contempotaty contexts, a
Boyer argues that “performance practice,” rather than compositional
and notated style, yields the distinctive character of Tindley’s songs.” 4
This gospel hymn style is also characteristic of the pioneering composi-
tions of Lucy Campbell and many subsequent composer-arrangers.
Rural Gospel
A second form of transitional gospel music emerged as a counter-
part of the rural blues. As Fritz Marschall points out, two distinct .
types of performers produced this small but important component Arizone Dri
of emerging gospel music: (1) “che singer who recorded only religious ~atiness-Parce::
songs and who quite often looked on the blues as sinful,” and (2) “the ase mes pees 7
artist who was quite happy to sing both gospel songs and the blues.”” ee ae
Typically sung by solo vocalists with acoustic guitar or harmonica mgt ped ply bie mee
accompaniment, the rural or “country” gospel tradition is charac- Seniodes |
terized by minimal chord changes and variable rhythmic structures
that typified rural blues around the turn of the twentieth century. stato ft
Performers who represented this style include Blind Willie Johnson - —
and Blind Mamie Forehand, among others. ss Sree che =P Es
Holiness-Pentecostal Style Tanemanwnirs:
It was in the context of the newly formed Pentecostal denomina- «= tuner A325
tion that the third form of transitional gospel music evolved. In this P.Eate i FIT
setting, the style and feeling of the folk spiritual is most evident. -EGEi2 [RINE 7
Those congregations that evolved from the 1906-1908 Azuza Street att Beg Se F058:
Revival in Los Angeles, under the leadership of William J. Seymour, 2 Sebi? BS LoD
embraced a worship style that was uninhibited and highly demon- | ends es eek
strative. Under the anointing of the Holy Spirit, congregants sang, “lie Pherae
clapped their hands, shouted, and danced with exuberance to the ac- TP ek ges ST
companiment of instruments shunned by the traditional Baptist and SIT ad
Methodist denominations—trombones, trumpets, mandolins—and ee = ae
even jugs. The spirit of the worship was celebratory, and the songs soe ee
themselves were reminiscent of, and in some instances virtually iden- ee
tical to, the folk spiritual repertoire. - FPS
The one-room folk church of the rural South became the store- Se Ts
front church of the urban North—a key setting for the emergence of s * Begee ©
gospel music. As I have argued previously: <= = =
Black urban religious music, particularly in the newly formed Pentecostal de-
nomination, differed little from the folk spiritual of the rural South, except for
instrumental accompaniment. Both song types were based on the call-response
structure; both required a demonstrative style of delivery, compiete with hand- ,
clapping and dancing in the spirit; and both were sung in heterophony.”!
68 African American Music
a

--- Page 19 ---
|
H
> : ol - ue. Thomas A. Dorsey in
; : ae i ea. i 1975 at the piano.
. P : eee 3 ree. s
os ew e a Ae Photo by Amy van
a ee Singel
a=" ame tL Sel) COUNLESy
- | 92 Se et j BluEsoterica.com.
7 Ak -
e he an 9 ered B.. we ey oe E
: a RT Son i)
i, N 5 Me ~
P n - : a = Soy : wa . ’ s : |
Roe ., ne es |
” a ee 4 us ‘ ss 4 ;
ie Arizona Dranes was one of the most celebrated pioneers of the |
Ss Holiness-Pentecostal style. Although her recording career spanned
e only two years (1926-1928), her highly rhythmic, percussive ragtime |
° piano style and her powerful, shouted vocal leads represent the epito-
a me of the high-energy delivery that characterizes Pentecostal worship {
C even today.
5 |
TRADITIONAL GOSPEL MUSIC Traditional i
Sr . i 1
a . . . ospel music :
During the 1930s, the genre of traditional gospel music emerged, ome i
: _ Black religious : |
created by the meshing of the three strands of transitional gospel. inusic which
The man who figured most prominently in this merger was Thomas emerged in ’
- A. Dorsey (1899-1993), now referred to as the Father of Gospel Music; urban contexts 4
- (Figure 3.4). Dorsey and two other important gospel music pioneers, during the
‘S : . . i f
. Mahalia Jackson (1912-1972) and Roberta Martin (1907-1969), 1930s; pervasive
. arrived in Chicago as a part of the Great Migration. In the case of __ in present-day { |
7 Dorsey and Jackson, these pioneering spirits brought with them a African American 9 |
_ musical culture rooted in the sacred and secular traditions of the | worship. 9 {
. African American South; the northern context provided the impetus 4
~ for the growth of something new. q |
2 Born in Villa Rica, Georgia (near Atlanta), the son of an itiner- a
4 ant Baptist preacher, Dorsey grew up playing organ in church. As a 7 |
. boy, however, he also worked selling soda pop at a vaudeville theater q
> . at
7 in Atlanta, where he was regularly exposed to such blues performers "
- as Ma Rainey and Bessie Smith. Before devoting his career to gospel q
7 music, Dorsey became a prolific composer of both blues and jazz; he 4 |
2 acknowledged how his gospel style was influenced by his background a "
; in secular music: %
This rhythm I had, I brought with me to gospel songs. I was a blues singer, and a
I carried that with me into the gospel songs....I always had rhythm in my bones. a
. Ilike the solid beat. I like the moaning groaning tone. | like the rock. You know F
a how they rock and shout in the church. I like it... Black music calls for move- x
- ment! It calls for feeling. Don’t let it get away.” q
BO
Religious Music 69 q
